                                                                                             8
                          Chapter 8 - NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler
8.1   Introduction
NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler can be used by an administrator to reduce the energy
costs, and the costs associated with (cloud) storage, by compute nodes. This can be done by changing
their power state, or their existence state, according to workload demands. The idea behind Auto Scaler
is that it automatically scales a cluster up or down, on-demand, by powering up physical nodes or cloud
nodes.
    On the cluster itself, Auto Scaler is implemented by the cm-scale service. The scaling is carried out
according to settings in the ScaleServer role which set the nodes that are to use the cm-scale service.
    The cm-scale service runs as a daemon. It collects information about workloads from different
workload engines, and it uses knowledge of the nodes in the cluster. In the case of HPC jobs, the daemon
also gathers knowledge of the queues that the jobs are to be assigned to, and also gathers knowledge on
which of the HPC jobs are requesting exclusive node access.
    Based on the workload engine information and queues knowledge, the cm-scale service can clone
and start compute nodes when the workloads are ready to start. The service also stops or terminates
compute nodes, when no queued or running workloads remain on the managed nodes.

8.1.1 Use Cases
The cm-scale service can be considered as a basis for the construction of different kinds of dynamic
data centers. Within such centers, nodes can be automatically re-purposed from one workload engine
setup to another, or they can be powered on and off based on the current workload demand.
   A few use cases are discussed next, to show how this basis can be built upon:

  1. An organization wants to run PBS Professional and Slurm on the same cluster, but how much one
     workload engine is used relative to the other varies over time. For this case, nodes can be placed
     in the same pool and shared. When a node finishes an existing job, the cm-scale service can then
     re-purpose that node from one node category to another if needed, pretty much immediately. The
     re-purposing decision for the node is based on the jobs situation in the PBS Professional and Slurm
     queues.

  2. An organization would like to use their cluster for both Kubernetes and for Slurm jobs. For this
     case, the admin adds Kubernetes- and Slurm-related settings to the ScaleServer role. Using these
     settings, the cm-scale service then switches nodes from one configuration overlay to another. For
     example, if Slurm jobs are pending and there is a free Kubernetes node, then the node is turned
     into a Slurm node pretty much immediately. A configuration example for this case is given in
     section 8.4.9.
464                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

  3. An organization has a small cluster with Slurm installed on it, and would like to be able to run
     more jobs on it. This can be carried out using BCM’s Cluster Extension cloudbursting capability
     (Chapter 3 of the Cloudbursting Manual) to extend the cluster when there are too many jobs for
     the local cluster. The extension to the cluster is made to a public cloud provider, such as AWS or
     Azure. The cm-scale service then tracks the Slurm queues, and decides whether or not new cloud
     nodes should be added from the cloud as extensions to the local network and queues. When the
     jobs are finished, then the cloud nodes are terminated automatically. Cluster extension typically
     takes several minutes from prepared images, and longer if starting up from scratch, but in any
     case this change takes longer than simple re-purposing does.
  4. An organization runs PBS Professional only and would like to power down free, local, physical
     nodes automatically, and start up such nodes when new jobs come in, if needed. In this case,
     cm-scale follows the queues and decides to stop or to start the nodes automatically depending on
     workload demand. Nodes typically power up in several minutes, so this change takes longer than
     simple re-purposing does.

8.1.2 Resource Constraints
When the service considers whether or not the node is suited for the workload
  1. it matches the following requested node resources:
       (a) the number of CPUs (in Kubernetes this value can be fractional);
       (b) the number and type of GPUs (only the number of NVIDIA GPUs is considered for the Ku-
           bernetes engine);
       (c) the amount of memory;
  2. and, for Kubernetes, the following additional resources:
       (a) pods;
       (b) ephemeral storage;
       (c) extended resources.
      Other types of resources are not considered.
      An extended resource is considered by cm-scale if the administrator adds it to the
      KUBE_EXTENDED_RESOURCES list in config.py. For example:

      Example

      opts: dict[str, Any] = {
        ...
        KUBE_EXTENDED_RESOURCES": ["fpga"],
      }

      For HPC workload engines that are unsupported by cm-scale, the resources validation is carried
      out by the HPC engine. If a resource that is requested by the workload cannot be provided by the
      node, then the HPC engine specifies a pending reason. The pending reason is used by cm-scale
      to decide on node operations.
      For Kubernetes, all the used resources must explicitly be specified as extended resources.
      When the Kubernetes engine is configured, then cm-scale uses the maxPods value from the kubelet
      role as a maximum for the available pod slots per node.
      The parallelism parameter in the job definition YAML sets the number of pod copies to start.
      If a Kubernetes job sets the parallelism parameter, then cm-scale tries to find nodes to satisfy
      the number of pod copies for the job. The metric kube_job_spec_parallelism (page 989) tracks the
      parallelism value for a job.
8.1 Introduction                                                                                     465

    For Kubernetes, cm-scale for now supports only NVIDIA GPUs. However, other types of GPUs can
be configured in cm-scale as extended resources. If a pod or a job requests a resource with the name
nvidia.com/gpu, then cm-scale gets the number of allocatable resources per node in the cluster with
this particular resource name, and tries to match it with the pod or job request.
    In cmsh, the wlmresources command displays the workload manager engine resources that Auto
Scaler considers.
Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device
[basecm11->device]% wlmresources
WLM      Name              Amount         Nodes
-------- ----------------- -------------- ----------------
pbspro cpu_total           32             node001..node006
pbspro gpu_free            1              node005
pbspro gpu_free            2              node001..node00+
pbspro mem_free            8,108,032,000 node004,node005
pbspro mem_free            948,224,000    node006
slurm    cpu_alloc         2              node001..node006
slurm    cpu_total         16             node006
slurm    cpu_total         8              node001..node005
slurm    gpu_free          1              node005
slurm    gpu_free          2              node001..node004
slurm    mem_free          1,000,000,000 node006
slurm    mem_free          380,000,000    node004
slurm    mem_free          6,778,000,000 node005
slurm    mem_free          7,257,000,000 node001..node003
uge      cpu_total         32             node001..node00+
uge      gpu_free          1              node005
uge      gpu_free          2              node001..node00+
uge      mem_free          0              node001..node003
uge      mem_free          1,396,000,000 node004
uge      mem_free          7,456,000,000 node005
uge      mem_free          990,900,000    node006
uge      mem_free_per_cpu 1,396,000,000 node004
uge      mem_free_per_cpu 990,900,000     node006
[basecm11->device]%

   These resources are taken from the workload managers, and are not necessarily equal to the available
physical resources on the nodes.

Number Of CPU Cores Calculation
The cm-scale service uses the number of CPU cores on a node in order to decide on whether a workload
should run on the node. The calculation of this number is optimized for many node scenarios.
    For each node, at the beginning of each cm-scale iteration, the following procedure is followed step-
by-step to determine the CPU cores number. The procedure for the current iteration stops when a step
yields a non-zero value, otherwise the next step is tried.

  1. If the engine is an HPC workload manager, then the workload manager client role is considered
     and its slots parameter is used. In the very unusual case of several workload manager roles as-
     signed to the node at the same time, then the minimum number of slots is calculated.

  2. If the node is a cloud node, then its flavor Type parameter in the case of EC2, or VMSize in case of
     Azure, is used. These parameters are accessible via cmsh, within device mode for the cloud node,
     within the cloudsettings submode. For EC2 nodes the flavor value (Type) can be set to a long
466                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

      statement such as: "62 EC2 Compute Units (16 virtual cores with 3.00 EC2 Compute Units each)",
      and for this statement 16 is used as the number of CPU cores. If the flavor is not defined on the
      node, then its cloud provider is considered.

  3. If a template node (page 480) is defined in the dynamic node provider, and it is a cloud node,
     then the template node flavor is used for the CPU core number in the same way as shown in the
     preceding step.

  4. If the Default Resources parameter (in a resource provider) contains cpus:engine=N, where N is
     a number of CPU cores, then N is used. For Kubernetes, the number of CPUs can be fractional.

  5. If the node exists at this moment (for example, it is not just cloned in BCM), then the CPU cores
     number is requested from CMDaemon, which collects nodes system information. This is used as
     one of the last methods because it is slow.

  6. If the node is defined in the ScaleServer role via the dynamic resource provider, then the CPU
     cores number is retrieved from its template node. This method is as slow as the preceding method.
     It is therefore not recommended when many nodes are managed by cm-scale, otherwise the it-
     eration can take several minutes. In such a case, setting the slots parameter manually is typically
     wiser, so that step 1 is the step that decides the CPU cores number.

    If cm-scale does not manage to find a value for the node, then it prints a warning in the log file and
does not make use of the node during the iteration. It is usually wise for the administrator to set the
slots parameter manually for nodes that otherwise persistently stay unused, so that resources are not
wasted.

Requested GPUs
When a user of a workload manager requests a number of GPUs for the job that is to be run, then
Auto Scaler presents nodes that have enough available GPUs for this job. For Slurm, in addition to
the number of GPUs, Auto Scaler recognizes the GPU type if the user specifies it. For other workload
managers only the number of GPUs is counted.
   Auto Scaler knows from CMDaemon via the workload manager what GPUs and what types are
available for that workload manager. Auto Scalar tracks the number of GPUs in use, or whether the
administrator has configured fewer GPUs than the node actually has. Auto Scaler is therefore aware of
what GPUs the workload managers can use during their job scheduling.
   If debug messages are enabled in ScaleServer role. then the number and type of requested GPUs, as
well as the number and types of available GPUs, can be found in the log file at /var/log/cm-scale.log

Requested Memory
A memory request is considered by Auto Scaler if a user specifies this request when the job is submitted.
    For Kubernetes, if a job or a pod defines a limit, then cm-scale uses that limit. If a limit is not set,
then Kubernetes limits are followed.
    For Slurm, if no memory requirement is specified by the job, then Slurm often sets its own defaults,
and cm-scale then uses those implicit values.
    GE does not provide the amount of memory requested by a user per node, but allocates memory per
CPU core. Thus, Auto Scaler by default operates with a memory amount per CPU core, which can also
be seen in the logs.

Default Resources Specification
Sometimes the available consumable resources must be defined explicitly by the administrator. This is
needed in the case of LSF, because when a node is down, LSF does not provide the available consumable
resources configured for the node. Therefore in this case Auto Scaler does not know if the node actually
has any of the resources known to LSF. The mechanism used for defining explicitly can also be used for
other workload managers, for testing purposes.
8.1 Introduction                                                                                   467

    For now, only the following types of consumable resources can be specified as default resources to
the Default Resources setting, under the Resource Provider parameter. The setting is a list of strings,
where each string specifies one of the following resources:
  1. cpus: the number of available CPU cores or Kubernetes CPUs, if other sources for this information
     do not provide a value (the calculation for the number of CPU cores is described on page 465).
     The cpus specification has the following format:
     cpus:<engine>=<amount>
     where <engine> is the name of the workload engine being used and <amount> is the amount of
     available CPUs.

     Example

     cpus:kube=8.5
     or
     cpus:slurm=16
  2. mem_free: the amount of available memory. If no units are specified, then bytes are assumed. It is
     also possible to append one of the following units:

                                     Multiple-byte units
              Decimal SI-style                                  Binary IEC-style
       name          unit or abbreviation               name            unit or abbreviation
       kilobytes     KB or K                            kibibytes       KiB or Ki
       megabytes     MB or M                            mebibytes       MiB or Mi
       gigabytes     GB or G                            gigibytes       GiB or Gi
       terabytes     TB or T                            tebibytes       TiB or Ti
       petabytes     PB or P                            pebibytes       PiB or Pi

     The format of the memory specification is the following:
     mem_free:<engine>=<amount>
     where <engine> is the name of the workload engine which "provides" this value, and <amount> is
     the amount of memory.

     Example

     mem_free:lsf1=32GB
  3. gpu_free: the number of available GPUs. The format of the GPUs specification is:
     gpu_free[:<type>]:<engine>=<number>
     where <type> is a string that specifies the GPUs type (available only for Slurm). Only a single
     GPU type per node is currently supported. <number> is a number of GPUs, and <engine> is the
     name of the workload engine which "provides" this value.

     Example

     gpu_free:a100:uge3=8
     or
     gpu_free:lsf=1
468                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

8.1.3 Setup
In order to set up Auto Scaler the administrator can run the cm-auto-scaler-setup script. The setup
allows one of the three base scenarios to be configured. This is possible in express mode as well as in
step-by-step mode. When the setup is complete, the administrator can further tune the behaviour of
Auto Scaler within the ScaleServer role. The Scaleserver role is always assigned to the head nodes,
via a new configuration overlay named autoscaler.
    The setup tool assigns the role. The role, in turn, starts the cm-scale system service (Auto Scaler).
Auto Scaler can be disabled by running cm-auto-scaler-setup again, and selecting the menu item
Disable. When Auto Scaler is disabled, the configuration overlay is removed.
    The service writes logs to /var/log/cm-scale.log. Running the cm-scale daemon in the fore-
ground for debugging or demonstration purposes is also possible, using the -f option. Other additional
options that may be used, including at the same time, are:

   • -d: debug logs

   • -i <N>: number (<N>) of iterations

The logs are then duplicated to STDOUT:

Example

root@basecm11$ module load cm-scale
root@basecm11$ cm-scale -f
[...]

   When cm-auto-scaler-setup is started the administrator can select from one of the following setup
operations (figure 8.1):

   • express setup,

   • step-by-step setup,

   • disable.




                               Figure 8.1: Auto Scaler Setup Operations

   • Express setup allows an initial setup to be carried out, without many questions being asked. It
     applies default values whereever possible. Some inputs that do not have default values are still
     needed. Express setup is a good start for the administrators who have never used Auto Scaler
     before.

   • Step-by-step setup allows an initial setup to be carried out too, but with some more questions to
     help tune the cluster to the needs of the administrator. This is more suitable for administrators
     with some experience in Auto Scaler configuration.
8.1 Introduction                                                                                    469

    After the wizard has carried out the deployment, both the express and the step-by-step configuration
can have their configurations tuned further via cmsh, within the scaleserver role.
    Express setup and step-by-step setup both allow one of the 4 pre-defined use case scenarios to be
selected (figure 8.2):




                           Figure 8.2: Auto Scaler Setup Scenario Selection

   These use cases are:

  1. Workload Manager (On-premises): Auto Scaler tracks selected workload manager queues, and
     starts or stops specified on-premises nodes on demand. A static node provider is automatically
     added to the role for this scenario.

  2. Workload Manager (Cluster Extension): Auto Scaler dynamically clones nodes from a cloud tem-
     plate node, on demand. The nodes can be terminated or stopped when idle. This scenario is used
     when cloudbursting is set up, and there is a cloud director. A dynamic node provider is added
     automatically to the role for this scenario.

  3. Workload Manager (Cluster in Cloud): As in the preceding use case, Auto Scaler dynamically
     clones nodes from a cloud template node, on demand. In this scenario, there is no cloud director,
     and the entire cluster must reside in the cloud.

  4. Kubernetes (On-premises): Auto Scaler tracks Kubernetes jobs or individual pods, and starts or
     stops the nodes on demand. A static node provider is automatically added to the role for this
     scenario.

    Static nodes and dynamic nodes providers are discussed in section 8.2.2.
    In step-by-step mode, for the next step, the dialog suggests specifying Auto Scaler base options
(figure 8.3):




                              Figure 8.3: Auto Scaler Setup Base Options

   The Auto Scaler base options are:

   • Enable debug messages: Auto Scaler adds debug messages to its log file (default: /var/log/
     cm-scale).
470                                                       NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

   • Dry run mode: Disables actual execution of any operation on the cluster. Auto Scaler decisions are
     still all written to the log file.

   • Run interval: Number of seconds that Auto Scaler waits before making new decisions regarding
     cluster auto scaling.

Use Case: Workload Manager (On-premises)
When this scenario is selected, then the next step is to configure the static nodes provider. First, cate-
gories and individual nodes to be managed by Auto Scaler are selected. The nodes of a selected category,
or individual nodes, are added to the node provider (figures 8.4 and 8.5):




                Figure 8.4: Auto Scaler Setup Categories Selection For Static Node Provider




             Figure 8.5: Auto Scaler Setup Individual Nodes Selection For Static Node Provider

      The next step is to pick the workload manager cluster (figure 8.6):




                         Figure 8.6: Auto Scaler Setup Workload Manager Selection
8.1 Introduction                                                                                        471

   If only one workload manager instance exists, then the screen is skipped. The screen provides a list
of workload manager names that cm-wlm-setup has set up. The cm-auto-scaler-setup wizard only
configures one workload manager cluster, but others can be added later as separate workload engines
with the ScaleServer role.
   If running express mode, then the summary screen is displayed. The summary screen includes
options to just show the configuration file, or to save the configuration and deploy the setup (figure 8.7):




                                 Figure 8.7: Auto Scaler Setup Summary

    If running step-by-step mode for the workload manager, then there are some additional tune up
screens:
    Values can be set for resources in the default node resources screen (figure 8.8):




                            Figure 8.8: Auto Scaler Setup Default Resources

   Resources that can be set are:

  1. number of CPU cores per node. Format: <number>

  2. number (and optionally, type) of GPUs per node. Format: [<type>]:<number>

  3. available memory for jobs per node. Units can be specified as: KB, K, KiB, MB, M, MiB, GB, G, GiB,
     TB, T, TiB, PB, P, PiB. Format: <amount>[<unit>]. If no units are specified, then bytes are assumed.

When Auto Scaler considers whether or not the node is suited for the workload, it considers the follow-
ing requested resources:
   In cmsh, the wlmresources command, executed in devices mode, displays the resources that Auto
Scaler considers. These resources are taken from the corresponding workload manager, and are not
necessarily equal to the available physical resources on the nodes. Sometimes the available consumable
resources must be defined explicitly by the administrator. This is needed if the node never started, or
472                                                        NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

if the WLM (such as in the case of LSF) does not provide node resource information when the node is
down. It is recommended that these values are always defined. If nodes vary in their resource require-
ments, then, after setup, an administrator can add new resource providers (within the ScaleServer role)
and set the various default resources for the various groups of nodes.
    In the next screen the administrator can specify some WLM engine settings (figure 8.9):




                                Figure 8.9: Auto Scaler Setup Engine Settings

      The settings are:

   • Engine Priority: The workload engine priority. This value is used when the final (global) work-
     load priority is calculated by Auto Scaler. If 0, then this priority is not taken into account.

   • Workloads Per Node: The maximum number of WLM jobs that can be started on a node.

   Auto Scaler fetches the workload priority values from the settings specified in the next screen (fig-
ure 8.10):




                     Figure 8.10: Auto Scaler Setup Workload Priorities Source Selection

      The settings are:

   • Fetched: Priorities are fetched from workload engine. Age and engine priorities are ignored. This
     option sets the age factor to 0.0, and engine priority to 0

   • Calculated: Priorities are calculated from the workload age and engine priority. Both can be
     tuned by the administrator in ScaleServer role. This option sets the age factor to 1.0, and the
     external priority factor to 0.0

      Workload trackers settings can be set in the next screen (figure 8.11):
8.1 Introduction                                                                                      473




                            Figure 8.11: Auto Scaler Setup Tracker Settings

   The settings are:

   • Queue Length Threshold: Number of pending workloads. If this number is reached, then nodes
     are triggered to start up.

   • Age Threshold: Workload pending time threshold, in seconds. If a workload reaches this age
     while pending, then nodes are triggerd to start up for that workload.

   • Workloads Per Node: The maximum number of WLM jobs that can be started on a node for that
     tracker. A value of 0 means no limit is set.

    The settings are applied to all configuring queue trackers. The values can be tuned further afterwards
in the ScaleServer role.

Use Case: Workload Manager (Cluster Extension)
In the case of workload manager cluster extension scenario, a dynamic node provider with a template
node is configured. In this scenario the administrator should expect cloud nodes to be triggered, which
run in a previously configured and deployed cluster extension.
    Cluster extension configuration and deployment in BCM is described in Chapter 3 of the Cloudburst-
ing Manual, and can be carried out, for example, for a particular cloud provider. For command line
deployment, the cm-cluster-extension setup script can be run.
    Cloud nodes are thus cluster nodes that extend into a cloud provider, and which are cloned and
terminated depending on workload demand.
    To configure a cluster extension with Auto Scaler, the administrator is asked to pick a cloud provider
(figure 8.12):




                             Figure 8.12: Auto Scaler Setup Cloud Provider

  With the express setup, the next screen asks for workload manager selection (figure 8.6).
  With the step-by-step setup, however, some additional screens are presented before getting to the
workload manager selection screen. These extra screens are described next.
474                                                   NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

   The Auto Scaler template node selection screen (figure 8.13) prompts for the selection of a template
node that is to be used for cloud node cloning.




                            Figure 8.13: Auto Scaler Setup Template Node

    The selected template node is then set in the dynamic node provider.
    The Auto Scaler incrementing network interface screen (figure 8.14) prompts the administrator to
select the network interface on the template node that is automatically incremented when the node is
cloned.




               Figure 8.14: Auto Scaler Setup Incremented Network Interface Selection

   The Auto Scaler node range specification screen (figure 8.15) prompts the administrator to specify a
node range. Range format can be used. Nodes are automatically created by Auto Scaler on demand in
the cloud according to the range specified.




                             Figure 8.15: Auto Scaler Setup Node Range
8.1 Introduction                                                                                        475

  The remaining screens in this use case have been covered in the earlier section (Use Case: Workload
Manager (On-premises), page 470) , and are:

   • default node resources (figure 8.8),

   • engine settings (figure 8.9),

   • workload priorities (figure 8.10),

   • tracker settings (figure 8.11).

Use Case: Workload Manager (Cluster in Cloud)
If a workload manager (Cluster in Cloud) option is chosen from figure 8.2, then the screens that are
displayed next follow the same steps as in the preceding case of a workload manager (Cluster Extension)
(starting at page 473).

Use Case: Kubernetes (On-premises)
If a Kubernetes (On-premises) scenario is chosen from figure 8.2, and if Kubernetes has been set up
(Chapter 4 of the Containerization Manual) then the screens that are displayed next are related to Kuber-
netes and Auto Scaler integration. Auto Scaler tracks Kubernetes jobs or individual pods, and can start
or stop the on-premises nodes on demand.
    The first screen displayed after the scenario is selected, is a screen that asks for node categories and
individual nodes that are to be configured in the static resource provider. Such nodes are the only ones
to be managed by Auto Scaler. Category and node selection screens are then displayed as in the earlier
sections (figures 8.4 and 8.5).
    The administrator is then prompted to select a Kubernetes cluster (figure 8.16).




                      Figure 8.16: Auto Scaler Setup Kubernetes Cluster Selection

    If there is only one Kubernetes cluster, then this screen is skipped, and the Kubernetes configuration
is used for the integration with Auto Scaler.
    The next screen prompts for the Kubernetes engine settings (figure 8.17):

   • Engine Priority: A workload engine priority. This value is used when the final (global) work-
     load priority is calculated by Auto Scaler. If 0, then this priority is not taken into account.

   • Workloads Per Node: The maximum number of Kubernetes jobs, or individual Kubernetes pods
     without a controller, that can be started on a node.

   • CPU Busy Threshold: The CPU load % that defines if node is too busy for new pods.

   • Memory Busy Threshold: The Memory load % that defines if node is too busy for new pods.
476                                                       NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler




                          Figure 8.17: Auto Scaler Setup Kubernetes Engine Settings

   The administrator is then prompted to pick the Kubernetes namespace that will be tracked by Auto
Scaler (figure 8.18):




                      Figure 8.18: Auto Scaler Setup Kubernetes Namespace Selection

      In step-by-step mode, the namespace tracker settings are then displayed (figure 8.18):




                   Figure 8.19: Auto Scaler Setup Kubernetes Namespace Tracker Settings

      The settings are:
   • Queue Length Threshold: If this number of pending workloads is exceeded, then that triggers
     nodes starting up.

   • Age Threshold: Workload pending time threshold, in seconds. If the age of the workload is
     greater than this, then nodes are triggered to start for this workload.
8.2 Configuration                                                                                     477

   • Workloads Per Node: The maximum number of Kubernetes jobs, or individual Kubernetes pods
     without a controller, that can be started on a node for that namespace tracker. A value of 0 means
     no limit is set.

    The settings are applied to all configuring namespace trackers. The values can be tuned further
afterwards within the ScaleServer role.
    The summary screen is displayed next (figure 8.7). Selecting Save config & deploy saves the con-
figuration and starts the setup procedure.

8.1.4 Workload Roles Assignment Limitations Per Node With cm-scale
The cm-scale service allows multiple workload managers to be considered on the same cluster, and
besides supporting HPC workload managers, also supports Kubernetes as a type of workload engine.
    However, more than one engine role should not be assigned to a node at one time. Thus, for example,
assigning a Slurm role and a PBS role at the same time to a node should not be done. Nor, for example,
should there be a Kubernetes role and a workload management role assigned at the same time to a node.


8.2   Configuration
8.2.1 The ScaleServer Role
To configure cm-scale, the cluster administrator configures the ScaleServer role. The role is typically
assigned to head nodes:

Example

[basecm11]% device use master
[basecm11->device[basecm11]]% roles
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles]% assign scaleserver

The role is configured by setting values to its settings. There are some advanced settings for less common
options:
[basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]]% show
Parameter                        Value
-------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
Name                             scaleserver
Revision
Type                             ScaleServerRole
Add services                     yes
Engines                          <0 in submode>
Resource Providers               <0 in submode>
Dry Run                          no
Debug                            no
Run Interval                     120
Advanced Settings                <submode>
[basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]]% advancedsettings
[basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->advancedsettings*]% show
Parameter                        Value
-------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
Debug2                           no
Max Threads                      16
Power Operation Timeout          30
Connection Retry Interval        5
Log File                         /var/log/cm-scale.log
Pin Queues                       no
Mix Locations                    yes
Failed Node Is Healthy           no
478                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Azure Disk Image Name              images
Azure Disk Container Name          vhds
Azure Disk Account Prefix
Node Selection                     Alphabetically
Node Selection Uptime Period       2w

      The advanced settings are:

   • Debug2: Enable printing very low level debug messages in the log file. This setting must be used
     with caution because it leads to a rapid increase in the log file size.

   • Max Threads: Maximum number of threads for sequential RPCs to CMDaemon.

   • Power Operation Timeout: Power operation RPC timeout, in seconds.

   • Connection Retry Interval: Connection to CMDaemon retry interval, in seconds.

   • Log File: Path to the log file (Default /var/log/cm-scale.log).

   • Pin Queues: Pin workloads to their queue nodes.

   • Mix Locations: Allow workload to be be offered to different locations (cloud and local).

   • Failed Node Is Healthy: Do not start a new node instead of a failed one.

   • Azure Disk Image Name: Image name for Azure disks.

   • Azure Disk Container Name: Container name for Azure disks.

   • Azure Disk Account Prefix: Prefix for randomly-generated Azure disk account names.

   • Node Selection: Type of node selection used by Auto Scaler. The values this can take are:

          – Alphabetically: This means that Auto Scaler picks next node to start according the node
            name.
          – Randomly: This means that the nodes are picked randomly, which helps make the node usage
            more even.
          – Uptime: This means that the nodes that have been used the least amount of time are picked
            first.

   • Node Selection Uptime Period: If Node Selection is set to uptime, then the Node Selection
     Uptime Period is the time period from now into the past, over which Auto Scaler calculates the
     total uptime for nodes. So, with the default setting of 2w this means that the uptime of nodes is
     calculated over the last 2 weeks.

   An overview of the parameters and submodes is given next. An example showing how they can be
configured is given afterwards, in section 8.3.

ScaleServer Role Global Parameters
The ScaleServer role has the following global parameters for controlling the cm-scale service itself:

   • Debug: Print debug messages to the log.

   • Dry Run: If set, then the service runs in dry run mode. In this mode it may claim that actions have
     been carried out on the nodes that use the cm-scale service, however, no action is actually carried
     out on nodes. This mode is useful for demonstration or debug purposes

   • Run Interval: interval, in seconds, between cm-scale decision-making
8.2 Configuration                                                                                       479

ScaleServer Role Submodes
Within the ScaleServer role are the following three submodes:

   • advancedsettings: allows some advanced properties to be set for cm-scale, using the parameters
     displayed on page 477.

   • resourceproviders: defines the nodes used by cm-scale. More explicitly, this submode is used
     to define resource provider objects. The resource providers can be added as static or dynamic
     types, and can then have nodes and settings defined within them. The nodes allocated to these
     resource provider objects are what provide resources to cm-scale when that resource provider is
     requested.

   • engines: define the engines used by cm-scale. This can be an instance of the type hpc, generic,
     or kubernetes (page 485).

        – trackers (within engines submode): define the trackers used by cm-scale (page 486)

   The parameters are enforced only when the next decision-making iteration takes place.

8.2.2 Resource Providers
The cm-scale service allows nodes to change state according to the workload demand. These man-
aged nodes are defined by the administrator within the resourceproviders submode of ScaleServer.
NVIDIA Base Command Manager 11 supports two types of resource providers: static and dynamic
node providers.

Static Node Provider
When managed nodes are well-known and will not be extended or shrunk dynamically, then a static
node provider can be used. Specifying settings for the static node provider allows cm-scale to power
on, power off, or re-purpose nodes, based on nodegroups or a list of nodes nodes specified with a node
list syntax (page 72).
     The static node provider supports the following properties:

   • Enabled: The static node provider is currently enabled.

   • Nodes: A list of nodes managed by cm-scale. These can be regular local compute nodes (nodes)
     or cluster extension cloud compute nodes (cnodes). For the purposes of this section on cm-scale,
     these compute nodes can conveniently be called nodes and cnodes. Since compute nodes are
     typically the most common cluster nodes, significant resources can typically be saved by having
     the cm-scale service decide on whether to bring them up or down according to demand.

        – cnodes can be cloned and terminated as needed. Cloning and terminating saves on cloud
          storage costs associated with keeping virtual machine images.
        – regular local compute nodes can be started and stopped as needed. This reduces power
          consumption.

   • Nodegroups: List of node groups (section 2.1.4) with nodes to be managed by cm-scale. Node
     groups are classed into types. The class of node group types is independent of the class of node types,
     and should not be confused with it.
     Node types are shown in the first column of the output of the default list command in device
     mode (page 53). The node types that can be managed by cm-scale are physicalnode and cloudnode.

   • Priority: The provider priority. Nodes in the pool of a provider with a higher priority are used
     first by workloads. By default a resource provider has a priority value 0. These priority values
     should not be confused with the fairsharing priorities of page 484.
480                                                     NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Dynamic Node Provider
When managed nodes can be cloned or removed from the configuration, then a dynamic node provider
should be used. A compute node that is managed by cm-scale as a dynamic node provider is configured
as a template node within the dynamic submode of the ScaleServer role.
    The dynamic node provider supports the following properties:
   • Template Node: A node that will be used as a template for cloning other nodes in the pool. The
     following restrictions apply to the template node:
        – A workload manager client role must be assigned with a positive number of slots.
        – New node names should not conflict with the node names of nodes in a nodegroup defined
          for the queue.
        – A specific template node is restricted to a specific queue.
      A template node only has to exist as an object in BCM, with an associated node image. A template
      node does not need to be up and running physically in order for it to be used to create clones.
      Sometimes, however, an administrator may want it to run too, like the other nodes that are based
      upon it, in which case the Start Template Node and Stop Template Node values apply.
        – Start Template Node: The template node specified in the Template Node parameter is also
          started automatically on demand.
        – Stop Template Node: The template node specified in the Template Node parameter is also
          stopped automatically on demand.
      An alternative to a template node is to use a snapshot (Chapter 3.4 of the Cloudbursting Manual),
      for greater cloud node startup speed.
   • Never Terminate: Number of cloud nodes that are never terminated even if no jobs need them.
     If there are this number or fewer cloud nodes, then cm-scale no longer terminates them. Cloud
     nodes that cannot be terminated can, however, still be powered off, allowing them to remain con-
     figured in BCM. As an aside, local nodes that are under cm-scale control are powered off auto-
     matically when no jobs need them, regardless of the Never Terminate value.
   • Never Terminate Nodes: A list of nodes specified with a node list syntax (page 72). These cloud
     nodes are never terminated, even if no jobs need them. Cloud nodes that cannot be terminated
     can, however, still be powered off. The nodes must already exist in the BCM configuration when
     Never Terminate Nodes is configured.
   • Enabled: Node provider is currently enabled.
   • Priority: Node provider priority.
   • Node Range: Range of nodes that can be created and managed by cm-scale.
   • Network Interface: Which node network interface is changed on cloning (incremented).
   • Remove Nodes: Should the new node be removed from BCM when the node terminates? If the
     node is not going to be terminated, but just stopped, then it is never removed.
   • Leave Failed Nodes:      If nodes are discovered to be in a state of INSTALLER_FAILED or
      INSTALLER_UNREACHABLE (section 5.5.4) then this setting decides if they can be left alone, so that
      the administrator can decide what do with them later on.
   • Default Resources: List of default resources, in format [name=value].
        – cpu: value is the number of CPUs
        – mem: value is in bytes
      These must be set when no real node instance is associated with a node defined in BCM.
8.2 Configuration                                                                                     481

Extra Nodes Settings For Node Providers
Both the dynamic and static node providers support extra node settings. If configured, then cm-scale
can start the extra nodes before the first workload is started, and can stop them after the last job from
the managed queue is finished.
    The most common use case scenario for extra nodes in the case of cloud nodes is a cloud direc-
tor node. The cloud director node provisions cloud compute nodes and performs other management
operations in a cloud.
    In the case of non-cloud non-head nodes, extra nodes can be, for example, a license server, a provi-
sioning node, or an additional storage node.
    The configuration settings include:

   • Extra Nodes: A list of extra nodes.

   • Extra Node Idle Time: The maximum time, in seconds, that extra nodes can remain unused. The
     cm-scale service checks for the existence of queued and active workloads using the extra node,
     when the time elapsed since the last check reaches Extra Node Idle Time. If there are workloads
     using the extra node, then the time elapsed is reset to zero and a time stamp is written into the
     file cm-scale.state under the directory set by the Spool role parameter. The time stamp is used
     to decide when the next check is to take place. Setting Extra Node Idle Time=0 means the extra
     node is stopped whenever it is found to be idle, and started again whenever workloads require it,
     which may result in a lot of stops and starts.

   • Extra Node Start: Extra node is started by cm-scale before the first compute node is started.

   • Extra Node Stop: Extra node is stopped by cm-scale after the last compute node stops.

Additional Settings For Node Providers
All of the node providers include the following settings that allows the Auto Scaler behavior to be tuned:

   • Keep Running: Nodes that should not be stopped or terminated even if they are unused (range
     format).

   • Shutdown Before Power Off: Shutdown nodes instead of just power off, and wait until a set
     timeout before doing a hard power off.

   • Shutdown Timeout: Shutdown timeout before powering off.

   • Allocation Prolog: Script that is executed when a node is allocated to a workload.

   • Allocation Epilog: Script that is executed when a node is deallocated.

   • Long starting node action: Action that is applied to a long starting node. A long starting node
     is a node that takes too long to start. Options:

        – none (default)
        – power off
        – terminate (applied to dynamic node provider only)

   • Long starting node timeout: How long Auto Scaler should wait before the action is applied for
     a long starting node.

   The following table summarizes the default attributes in cmsh for the resource providers, along the
cmsh path cmsh->device[]->roles->scaleserver->resourceproviders[dynamic/static]:
482                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Parameter                        static                           dynamic
---------------------------      -------------------------        ------------------------
Name                             static                           dynamic
Revision
Type                             static                           dynamic
Enabled                          yes                              yes
Priority                         0                                0
Whole Time                       0                                0
Stopping Allowance Period        0                                0
Keep Running
Extra Node
Extra Node Idle Time             1h                               1h
Extra Node Start                 yes                              yes
Extra Node Stop                  yes                              yes
Allocation Prolog
Allocation Epilog
Allocation Scripts Timeout       10s                              10s
Nodes                                                             N/A
Template Node                    N/A
Node Range                       N/A
Network Interface                N/A                              tun0
Start Template Node              N/A                              no
Stop Template Node               N/A                              no
Remove Nodes                     N/A                              no
Leave Failed Nodes               N/A                              yes
Never Terminate                  N/A                              32
Never Terminate Nodes            N/A
Nodegroups                                                        N/A
Default Resources                cpus=1                           cpus=1
Shutdown Before Power Off        yes                              yes
Shutdown Timeout                 3m                               3m
Long starting node action        None                             None
Long starting node timeout       10m                              10m
In the preceding table, the entry N/A means that the parameter is not available for the corresponding
resource provider.

8.2.3 Time Quanta Optimization
Time quanta optimization is an additional feature that cm-scale can use for further cost-saving with cer-
tain cloud providers.
    For instance, a cloud provider may charge per whole unit of time, or time quantum, used per cloud
node, even if only a fraction of that unit of time was actually used. The aim of BCM’s time quanta
optimization is to keep a node up as long as possible within the already-paid-for time quantum, but
without incurring further cloud provider charges for a node that is not currently useful. That is, the aim
is to:
   • keep a node up if it is running jobs in the cloud
   • keep a node up if it is not running jobs in the cloud, if its cloud time has already been paid for,
     until that cloud time is about to run out
   • take a node down if it is not running jobs in the cloud, if its cloud time is about to run out, in order
     to avoid being charged another unit of cloud time
    Time quanta optimization is implemented with some guidance from the administrator for its asso-
ciated parameters. The following parameters are common for both static and dynamic node resource
providers:
8.2 Configuration                                                                                       483

   • Whole time. A compute node running time (in minutes) before it is stopped if no workload re-
     quires it. For example, the cloud provider may have a time quantum of 60 minutes. By default,
     BCM uses a value of Whole Time=0, which is a special value that means Whole Time is ignored.
     Ignoring it means that BCM does no time quanta optimization to try to optimize how costs are
     minimized, but instead simply takes down nodes when they are no longer running jobs.

   • Stopping Allowance Period. A time (in minutes) just before the end of the Whole Time period,
     prior to which all power off (or terminate) operations must be started. The parameter associated
     with time quanta optimization is the Stopping Allowance Period. This parameter can also be set
     by the administrator. The Stopping Allowance Period can be understood by considering the last
     call time period. The last call time period is the period between the last call time, and the time that
     the next whole-time period starts. If the node is to be stopped before the next whole-time charge
     is applied, then the last call time period must be at least more than the maximum time period
     that the node takes to stop. The node stopping period in a cluster involves cleanly stopping many
     processes, rather than just terminating the node instance, and can therefore take some minutes.
     The maximum period in minutes allowed for stopping the node can be set by the administrator in
     the parameter Stopping Allowance Period. By default, Stopping Allowance Period=0. Thus,
     for nodes that are idling and have no jobs scheduled for them, only if the last call time period is
     more than Stopping Allowance Period, does cm-scale stop the node.

   The preceding parameters are explained next.
   Figure 8.20 illustrates a time line with the parameters used in time quanta optimization.

                                      WHOLE_TIME periods
                                      (Time quanta)




                                                                                           time


             RUN_INTERVAL                      STOPPING_ALLOWANCE_PERIODs



                    legend for instances on time line:
                                 cm-scale runs, RUN_INTERVAL starts

                                 a time quantum ends and next one starts

                                 STOPPING_ALLOWANCE_PERIOD starts

                                 last call

                                 Figure 8.20: Time Quanta Optimization

    The algorithm that cm-scale follows, with and without time quanta optimization, can now be de-
scribed using the two parameters explained so far:

  1. cm-scale as part of its normal working, checks every Run Interval seconds to see if it should
     start up nodes on demand or shut down idling nodes.

  2. If it sees idling nodes, then:

      (a) If Whole Time has not been set, or is 0, then there is no time quanta optimization that takes
          place. The cm-scale service then just goes ahead as part of its normal working, and shuts
          down nodes that have nothing running on them or nothing about to run on them.
484                                                            NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

        (b) If a non-zero Whole Time has been set, then a time quanta optimization attempt is made. The
            cm-scale service calculates the time period until the next time quantum from public cloud
            starts. This time period is the current closing time period. Its value changes each time that
            cm-scale is run. If
                • the current closing time period is long enough to let the node stop cleanly before the next
                  time quantum starts, and
                • the next closing time period—as calculated by the next cm-scale run but also running
                  within the current time quantum—is not long enough for the node to stop cleanly before
                  the next quantum starts
               then the current closing time period starts at a time called the last call.
               In drinking bars, the last call time by a bartender allows some time for a drinker to place the
               final orders. This allows a drinker to finish drinking in a civilized manner. The drinker is
               meant to stop drinking before closing time. If the drinker is still drinking beyond that time,
               then a vigilant law enforcement officer will fine the bartender.
               Similarly, the last call time in a scaling cluster allows some time for a node to place its orders
               to stop running. It allows the node to finish running cleanly. The node is meant to stop
               running before the next time quantum starts. If the node is still running beyond that time,
               then a vigilant cloud provider will charge for the next whole time period.
               The last call time is the last time that cm-scale can run during the current whole-time period
               and still have the node stop cleanly within that current whole-time period, and before the
               next whole-time period starts. Thus, when Whole Time has been set to a non-zero time:
                 i. If the node is at the last call time, then the node begins with stopping
                ii. If the node is not at the last call time, then the node does not begin with stopping

       The algorithm goes back again to step 1.

8.2.4 Fairsharing Priority Calculation And Node Management
At intervals of Run Interval, cm-scale collects workloads using trackers configured in the
ScaleServer role, and puts all the workloads in a single internal queue. This queue is then sorted
by priorities. The priorities are calculated for each workload using the following fairsharing formula:

                                          pij = k1 × ai + k2 × b j + k3 × c j                               (8.1)
      where:

    pij is the global priority for the i-th workload of the j-th engine. Its value is used to re-order the
queue.
    k1 is the age factor. This is the agefactor parameter that can be set via cmsh in the engine submode
of the ScaleServer role. Usually it has the value 1.
    ai is the age of the workload. That is, how long has passed since the i-th job submission, in seconds.
This typically dominates the priority calculation, and makes older workloads a higher priority.
    k2 is the external priority factor. It is a floating point number in the range [0, 1], and is theExternal
Priority Factor parameter that can be set via cmsh in the engine submode of the ScaleServer role.
    bi is the workload priority retrieved from the engine.
    k3 is the engine factor. It is a floating point number in the range [0, 1], and is the enginefactor
parameter in the engine submode of the ScaleServer role.
    c j is the engine priority. This is the priority parameter in the engine submode of the ScaleServer
role.

    When all the workload priorities are calculated and the queue is re-ordered, then cm-scale starts to
find appropriate nodes for workloads. The workloads are selected in order, from the top of the queue
8.2 Configuration                                                                                         485

where the higher priority workloads are, to the bottom. This way a higher priority engine has a greater
chance of getting nodes for its workloads than a lower priority engine.
    The factors k1 , k2 and k3 in the equation 8.1 allow the significance of the related priority value in the
final result to be controlled. For example if only the priority fetched from the engine should be taken
into account, then k1 and k3 should be set to 0, and k2 to 1. Or, for example, when both the age and
engine priorities should be treated as equally important, then k1 and k3 can be set to 0.5 and k2 to 0.

8.2.5 Engines
Each workload engine considered by cm-scale must be configured within the engines submode within
the ScaleServer role. NVIDIA Base Command Manager 11 supports the following workload engines:

   • Slurm

   • PBS (OpenPBS and PBS Professional)

   • LSF

   Engines can be of three types:

   • hpc: for all HPC (High Performance Computing) workload managers

   • kubernetes: for Kubernetes

   • generic: for a generic type

Common Parameters For The cm-scale Engines
All three engine types have the following parameters and submode in common, although their values
may differ:

   • Workloads Per Node: The number of workloads, Kubernetes jobs, or individual Kubernetes pods
     without a controller, that can be scheduled to run on the same node at the same time.

        – For a Kubernetes engine this parameter restricts the number of jobs or individual pods per
          node. It does not restrict the total number of pods that can be run per node by the cm-scale
          scheduler. The parameter is taken into consideration by the cm-scale scheduler when it is
          searching for new nodes to start up, and does not configure Kubernetes itself.
           For example, a Kubernetes job, or Job with a capital ‘J’ in Kubernetes terminology, may consist
           of many pods. Then, if Workload Per Node is, for example, 2, then only 2 Jobs are run on the
           node.
           The number of pods is also taken into account by cm-scale, but this number is taken from the
           kubelet role, where the Max Pods option can be set. If the role is not assigned to a node, using
           a configuration overlay, cateogry, or node, then cm-scale assumes that there is no possibility
           for any pods to run on the node.

   • Priority: The engine priority

   • Age Factor: Fairsharing coefficient for workload age

   • Engine Factor: Fairsharing coefficient for engine priority

   • External Priority Factor: Fairsharing coefficient for external priority significance

   • Trackers: Enters the workload trackers submode
486                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Non-common parameters for the cm-scale engines:
   • For the hpc engine:

          – WLM Cluster: A workload manager cluster name. The name is set during workload manager
            setup as the instance name. In cmsh the WLM cluster names are listed under wlm mode. In
            Base View they can be seen along the navigation path HPC > Wlm Clusters.

   • For the kubernetes engine, the following parameters can be set:

          – Cluster: These are the Kubernetes clusters for which pods are to be tracked. BCM allows
            multiple Kubernetes clusters to run on a single compute cluster. Kubernetes must be already
            set up before this setting is configured.
          – CPU Busy Threshold: The CPU load is a value that can range from 0 to 1. The CPU Busy
            Threshold value defines if the node is too busy for new pods. Its default value is: 0.9.
          – Memory Busy Threshold: The Memory load is a value that can range from 0 to 1. The Memory
            Busy Threshold defines if the node is too busy for new pods. Its default value is: 0.9.

    The CPU and Memory thresholds configured in the Kubernetes engine help cm-scale to decide
when more nodes are needed. But cm-scale also retrieves the number of pods that are already running
on the node and compares it with the Max Pods parameter that is configured in the kubelet role assigned
to the node via at the configuration overlay level, category level, or node level. If the number of running
pods is already equal or greater than the value of Max Pods, then (from the cm-scale point of view) the
node cannot fit more pods, which means that a new node is needed.

8.2.6 Trackers
A workload tracker is a way to specify the workload and its node requirements to cm-scale. For HPC,
the tracker may be associated with a specific queue, and cm-scale then tracks the jobs in that queue.
    One or more trackers can be named and enabled within the trackers submode, which is located
within the engines submode of the ScaleServer role. A queue (for workload managers) can be assigned
to each tracker.

Example

      There are three types of tracker objects supported in NVIDIA Base Command Manager 11:

   • queue: Used with an HPC type engine, where each workload (job) is associated with a particular
     queue. The attribute Type takes the value ScaleHpcQueueTracker, and the attribute Queue is set to
     the queue name for the job.

   • namespace: Used with a kubernetes type engine.

   • generic: Used with a generic type engine.

      The following settings are common for both types of trackers:

   • Enabled: Enabled means that workloads from this tracker are considered by cm-scale.

   • Allowed Resource Providers: Only the specified resource providers (in the scaleserver role) will
     be used for a workload of this tracker (if empty than all allowed).

   • Assign Category: A node category name that should be assigned to the managed nodes. When
     a node is supposed to be used by a workload, then cm-scale should assign the node category to
     that node. If the node is already running, and has no workloads running on it, but its category
     differs from the category specified for the jobs of the queue, then the node is drained, stopped and
     restarted on the next decision-making iteration of cm-scale, and takes on the assigned category.
     Further details on this are given in the section on dynamic nodes re-purposing, page 502.
8.2 Configuration                                                                                      487

   • Primary Overlays: A list of configuration overlays.
     If a workload is associated with the tracker for which the overlays are specified by Primary
     Overlays, then BCM-managed nodes are appended to those configuration overlays by cm-scale.
     This takes place after the node is removed from the previous overlays that it is associated with.
     If the node is already running, but has not yet been appended to the overlays specified for the
     workloads of the tracker, then the node is restarted when no other workloads run on the node,
     before going on to run the workloads with the new overlays.

        – When a workload is associated with the tracker that has Primary Overlays set, then the pool
          of cm-scale-managed nodes is checked.
          The check is to decide on if a node is to be made available for the workload.
          If the node is appended to the Primary Overlays already and is not running workloads, then
          cm-scale simply hands over a workload from the tracker to run on the node.
          If the node is not appended to the Primary Overlays already, and is not running workloads,
          then cm-scale prepares and boots the node as follows:

            * the node is drained and rebooted if it is up, or
            * the node is undrained and merely booted if it is not up
          The node is removed from any previous overlays that it was with, before booting up, and it
          is appended to the new overlays of Primary Overlays.

   • The threshold settings:

        – Queue Length Threshold: number of pending workloads that triggers cloudbursting.
        – Age Threshold: workload pending time threshold, in seconds, that triggers cloudbursting
          for this workload.

     The queue length and age thresholds allow the administrator to set when cm-scale starts or creates
     cloudbursting nodes. Both thresholds can be used at the same time, or just one of them can be used
     and the other can be ignored by setting it to 0.
     If the queue length threshold is set, then cm-scale ignores pending workloads that are located
     higher (added later) than the threshold in the managed queue.

     Example

     Assuming there are 5 jobs in the queue, with job IDs 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, where the 1st one is the first
     in the queue. If the queue length threshold is 3, then only jobs 1, 2 and 3 are taken into account,
     while jobs 4 and 5 are ignored.

     Example

     If the age threshold is set to 100, then only workloads older than 100 seconds are taken into ac-
     count, while younger jobs are ignored.


  The queue type tracker has only one parameter specific to the tracker: Queue. This is set to the
workload queue that is being tracked.
488                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Namespace Tracker
The namespace tracker of cm-scale is used to track Kubernetes workloads. It tracks Kubernetes jobs
(via its Job controllers) and tracks individual pods. It does not start new nodes for pending pods owned
by other types of Kubernetes pod controllers, such as ReplicaSet, DaemonSet, and so on. If non-Job
controllers are running, then cm-scale will not stop or terminate those nodes.
    The tracker settings in cmsh or Base View include additional parameters that are in common with
other trackers:

  1. Controller Namespace: Tracks the Kubernetes namespace name. Only Kubernetes workloads
     from this namespace are tracked. To track more than one namespace, one tracker must be created
     per namespace.

  2. Object: Type of Kubernetes objects to track. BCM supports the following object types:

      (a) Job: A Kubernetes Job controller type represents one or several pods that are expected to
          eventually terminate. The controller nature makes this type of Kubernetes workload very
          suited to dynamic data centers.
      (b) Pod: Individual pod, without any controller.

    If the specified namespace does not exist in Kubernetes, then the tracked jobs or individual pods in
this namespace are ignored by cm-scale.

Generic Engine And Tracker
The cm-scale service is able to deal with workloads that use various workload types. In order to add
suuport of a new type of workload, the administrator

   • adds an engine of type generic

   • adds one or more trackers of type generic to the ScaleServer role

   • implements Tracker and Workload classes in the Python programming language

    When cm-scale starts a new iteration, it re-reads the engines and trackers settings from the
ScaleServer role, and searches for the appropriate modules in its directories. In the case of a custom
tracker, the module is always loaded according to the tracker handler path. When the tracker module
is loaded, cm-scale requests a list of workloads from each of the tracker modules. So, the aim of the
tracker module is to collect and provide the workloads to cm-scale in the correct format.
    The path to the tracker module should be specified in the handler parameter of the generic tracker
entity using cmsh or Base View as follows:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device roles master
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles]% use scaleserver
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]]% engines
...->roles[scaleserver]->engines]% add generic myengine
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[myengine*]]% trackers
...*[myengine*]->trackers]% add generic mytracker
...*[mytracker*]]% set handler /cm/local/apps/cm-scale/examples/custom_tracker/tracker.py
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[myengine*]->trackers*[mytracker*]]% commit
...->roles[scaleserver]->engines[myengine]->trackers[mytracker]]%

   In the preceding example, the handler file .../examples/tracker.py is an example that is provided
with the cm-scale package. Another example module file provided with the package is .../examples/
workload.py, which implements the ExampleWorkload class. Together, the two examples can be used
8.2 Configuration                                                                                       489

to generate any amount of simple workloads during each cm-scale iteration. It is recommended to use
the tracker and workload classes as templates for custom tracker and workload modules created by the
administrator.
    The generic engine does not have any specific parameters associated with its type. It only has pa-
rameters common to all of the engine types.
    If the generic engine is configured with at least one generic tracker in its role, then cm-scale loads
the handler module and uses two functions that are implemented in the class. The class name can be
chosen arbitrarily, but should contain the string “Tracker”, without the quotes. The two class functions
used are:

  1. __init__: initializes the tracker object. This can be omitted if there are no additional data values to
     initialize.

  2. get_workloads: returns a list of objects belonging to a new class inherited from the Workload class.
     This new class should be created by the administrator.

   The new workload class must provide the following functions and properties. The class name can
be chosen arbitrarily:

  1. __init__: initializes the workload object.

  2. to_string: returns a string that identifies the workload. This is printed to the log file.

  3. begin_timestamp: property that returns a unix timestamp that should be >0 if the workload is not
     allowed to start before that time. If it is 0 then it is ignored by cm-scale.

   For example, the following very simple tracker and workload classes can be implemented:

Example

class ExampleTracker(Tracker):
    def get_workloads(self):
        return [ExampleWorkload(self)]

class ExampleWorkload(Workload):
    def __init__(self):
        Workload.__init__(self, tracker)
        self.set_id("1")
        self._update_state()
        self._update_age()
        self._update_resources()

    def to_string(self):
        return "workload %s" % self._id

    def _update_state():
        self._set_pending()

    def _update_age(self):
        self._age = 0

    def _update_resources(self):
        node_res = NodeResource("*")

        cpus_res = CpusResource(1)
        node_res.add_resource(cpu_res)
490                                                     NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

        engine_res = EngineResource("myengine")
        node_res.add_resource(engine_res)

        self.add_resource(node_res)


   The classes should be located in different files, as Python module files. It is recommended, but not
required, to keep both the files in the same directory. The ExampleWorkload class initializes the workload
object with a state, age, and required resources. These values are described next.

State: The state can be pending, running or failed, which can be set with these appropriate functions:

   • self._set_pending()

   • self._set_running()

   • self._set_failed()

    If the state is running, then the workload is treated as one that occupies the nodes defined in the
resources list. Each NodeResource object in the resources thus represents one occupied node.
    If the state is pending, then the workload is treated as one that waits for free nodes. In this case
cm-scale tries to find (start or clone) some more nodes in order to allow the workload engine to start
this workload.
    The failed workload state is considered by cm-scale as exceptional. Such a workload is logged
in the log file, but is not considered when cm-scale decides what nodes to start or clone. Any other
workload state is also ignored by cm-scale.

Age: The age defines how many seconds the workload is waiting for its resources since being added
to the engine. Usually the engine can provide such information, so in the example age is set to 0, which
means the workload has been added to the workload engine just now. The age is used in the fairsharing
workload priority calculation (page 484). The value of age is not re-calculated by cm-scale after a
while. This means that the number that the module sets in the class is used during the iteration, and
then forgotten by cm-scale until the workload object is recreated from scratch on the next iteration.

Resources: The Workload class (a base class) includes the resources property with list types. This list
includes resource objects that are used by cm-scale in order to find appropriate nodes for the work-
load. The top level resource type is always NodeResource. There can be one or several node resources
requested by the workload.
    If the node names are known, then one NodeResource object is created per compute node.
    Otherwise a single NodeResource object is used as many times as the number of requested nodes,
with the name set to *, which is treated by cm-scale as any suitable node. The number of nodes can be
set in the NodeResource object with the set_amount(number) function of the resource.
    In the preceding example one (any) node resource is added to the workload request, and the require-
ment for CPU (cores) number is set to 1. The engine resource is used in order to restrict the running of
workloads from different engines to one node. Thus if a node has this resource assigned, then the node
can take on the workload. If no engine resource is assigned to the node, then it can also take on the
workload, but the engine resource of the workload is assigned to the node before other workloads are
considered.
    The resource types that can be added to the workload are defined in the Python module core/
resource.py:
   • NodeResource: top level resource, contains all other resources.

   • CpusResource: defines the number of cpu cores required or already used by the workload.
8.2 Configuration                                                                                     491

   • CategoryResource: node category required by the workload.

   • OverlayResource: required configuration overlay.

   • QueueResource: HPC queue that the workload (job) belongs to. Used only with engines that
     support queues.

   • EngineResource: engine name that the workload belongs to.

   • FeatureResource: required node feature (node property, in other terminology) that should be
     supported by the engine.

   Custom resource types are not supported for now.
   In order to drain a node in the custom engine before the node is stopped, and to undrain it before
the node is started, the administrator can write and configure three scripts:

   • Drain script: called before a node is drained by Auto Scaler.

   • Undrain script: called before node is undrained by Auto Scaler.

   • Drain status script: called when Auto Scaler retrieves information about the current node
     drain status.

    Either all of the three scripts must be configured, or none of them.
    It is useful to drain and undrain the nodes in order to ensure that the engine does not start new jobs
in time period between the instant that Auto Scaler decides to stop the node, and the instant that the
actual power operation is performed.
    The scripts are configured in the file:
 /cm/local/apps/cm-scale/lib/python3.12/site-packages/cmscale/config.py

with the GENERIC_DRAIN_COMMANDS parameter appended to the opts dictionary:

Example

  "GENERIC_DRAIN_COMMANDS": {
     "MyEngine":
       {"drain": "/cm/local/apps/cm-scale//examples/custom_drain/drain.py",
        "undrain": "/cm/local/apps/cm-scale/examples/custom_drain/undrain.py",
        "status": "/cm/local/apps/cm-scale/examples/custom_drain/drainstatus.py"}
  },

    Here, for each generic engine, a new dictionary is created that includes three items that correspond
to, and specify, the script paths. In the preceding example MyEngine is the engine name, and should be
the same as that defined in the ScaleServer role. If more then one generic engine is used then all of
them can be added to GENERIC_DRAIN_COMMANDS.
    It should be noted that if GENERIC_DRAIN_COMMANDS is defined in config.py, then CMDaemon does
not drain, or undrain, via cm-scale.
    All three scripts accept the same set of parameters, following the form:

   <script name> <engine name> <host name> [host name ...       ]

Example

drain.py MyEngine node001 node002 node003

   Each of those three scripts print the following information to standard output:

   • stdout: JSON structure that represents a map: hostname -> latest (new) drain status. For example:
492                                                     NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

      Example

              {"node001": 2, "node002": 2, "node003": 2}



      Here the numbers are enum values defined in pythoncm in the DrainResult class.

   • stderr: debug logs that are appended to cm-scale.log.

Enabling Node Shutdown
By default, cm-scale powers off nodes belonging to a resource pool once there is no more workload
for them. Resource providers can also enable shutdown, to allow the node to terminate gracefully.
Shutdown has two options that set its behavior directly:

   • Shutdown Enable: If set to yes, then the shutdown command is run to terminate the system ser-
     vices first, and after that a command is run to power off the system. A waiting time of Shutdown
     Timeout seconds takes place between the two commands.
   • Shutdown Timeout: The number of seconds to wait before powering off a node that is in a shut-
     down state.

   It may take more than Shutdown Timeout seconds for a node to power off, depending on the Run
Interval setting. For example, if Shutdown Timeout is 60, and Run Interval 50, then effectively the
Shutdown Timeout is 100, because the power off event only happens during an iteration execution of
cm-scale.

Multi-partition Slurm jobs
Slurm allows a user to submit a job that requests multiple queues. Auto Scaler detects such jobs and
tries to start nodes for the job. The queue with the maximum priority is first considered. If no nodes are
found in that partition, then the next requested partition in order of priority, is considered.
    The queue priority is taken from Slurm partition PriorityTier parameter, accessible via cmsh or
Base View.

   • In cmsh, the queue priorities can be seen from within jobqueue mode. In the following example
     there are 3 queues with different priorities:

      Example

      [root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
      [basecm11]% wlm jobqueue; list
      Name (key) Nodes
      ------------ ------------------------
      defq         node001..node005
      medq         node006..node009
      topq         node010..node012
      [basecm11->wlm[slurm]->jobqueue]% get defq prioritytier; get medq prioritytier; get topq prioritytier
      1
      5
      10
      [basecm11->wlm[slurm]->jobqueue]% use defq; help set | grep tier
         prioritytier ........ Jobs submitted to a partition with a higher priority tier value will be
                       dispatched before pending jobs in partition with lower priority tier value

   • In Base View the navigation path for the queue defq is:
     HPC > Workload Management Clusters > slurm > Job Queues > defq > Priority Tier
8.3 Examples Of cm-scale Use                                                                            493

    If multiple queue trackers are configured, and if queues are requested by the Slurm job that are
tracked by different trackers, then only one tracker sees the job—the tracker for which tracking queue
priority is the highest.
    If two queues have the same priority, then the next selection criterion is the order of placement of its
trackers (section 8.2.6) in the trackers list.
    For example, if the Auto Scaler (as defined by the scaleserver role) is running on the head node
basecm11, and if the trackers are, for example, mytracker and secondtracker, and if the engine is, for
example, myengine, then the order of placement can be listed in cmsh via the path indicated by:

Example

[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->engines[myengine]->trackers]% list
Name (key)       Enabled
---------------- -------
mytracker        yes
secondtracker    yes


8.3   Examples Of cm-scale Use
8.3.1 Simple Static Node Provider Usage Example
The example session that follows explains how a static node provider (page 479) can be configured and
used with cm-scale. The session considers a default cluster with a head node and 5 regular nodes which
have been previously defined in the BCM configuration. 3 of the regular nodes are powered down at the
start of the run. The power control for the nodes must be functioning properly, or otherwise cm-scale
cannot power nodes on and off.
    The head node has the Slurm server role by default, and the regular nodes run with the Slurm client
role by default. So, on a freshly-installed cluster, the roleoverview command should show something
like:

Example

[basecm11->device[basecm11]]% roleoverview | head -2; roleoverview | grep slurm
Role             Nodes                     Categories Configuration Overlays            Nodes up
---------------- ------------------------- ---------- --------------------------------- --------
slurmaccounting basecm11                              slurm-accounting                  1 of 1
slurmclient      node001..node005          default    slurm-client                      2 of 5
slurmserver      basecm11                             slurm-server                      1 of 1
slurmsubmit      basecm11,node001..node005 default    slurm-submit, wlm-headnode-submit 3 of 6

   A test user, fred can be created by the administrator (section 6.2), and an MPI hello executable
based on the hello.c code (from section 3.5.1 of the User Manual) can be built:

Example

[fred@basecm11 ~]$ module add shared openmpi/gcc/64 slurm
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ mpicc hello.c -o hello

    A batch file slurmhello.sh (from section 5.3.1 of the User Manual) can be set up. Restricting it to 1
process per node so that it spreads over nodes easier for the purposes of the test can be done with the
settings:

Example

[fred@basecm11 ~]$ cat slurmhello.sh
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -o my.stdout
494                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

#SBATCH --time=30 #time limit to batch job
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
module add shared openmpi/gcc/64/ slurm

mpirun /home/fred/hello

      The user fred can now flood the default queue, defq, with the batch file:

Example

[fred@basecm11 ~]$ while (true); do sbatch slurmhello.sh; done

   After putting enough jobs into the queue (a few thousand should be enough, and keeping it less than
5000 would be sensible) the flooding can be stopped with a ctrl-c.
   The activity in the queue can be watched:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# watch "squeue | head -3 ; squeue | tail -3"

Every 2.0s: squeue | head -3 ; squeue | tail -3                      Thu Sep 15 10:33:17 2016

                JOBID PARTITION     NAME       USER ST        TIME   NODES NODELIST(REASON)
                 6423      defq slurmhel       fred CF        0:00       1 node001
                 6424      defq slurmhel       fred CF        0:00       1 node002
                 6572      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Priority)
                 6422      defq slurmhel       fred R         0:00       1 node001
                 6423      defq slurmhel       fred R         0:00       1 node002

   The preceding indicates that node001 and node002 are being kept busy running the batch jobs, while
the remaining nodes are not in use. The ST column is a status column, and indicates whether the job is
CF (configuring), PD (pending), or R (running).
   Abusing squeue in a loop like this is regarded as a bad practice, and doing it should be minimized.
   The administrator can check on the job status via the job metrics of cmsh too, using the options to the
filter command, such as --pending or --running:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh -c "wlm use slurm; jobs; watch filter --running -u fred"
Every 2.0s: filter --running -u fred                          Wed May 7 12:50:05 2017
Job ID Job name      User Queue Submit time Start time End time Nodes           Exit code
------ ------------- ---- ----- ----------- ---------- -------- --------------- ---------
406    slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:56     16:27:21   N/A      node001,node002 0


and eventually, when jobs are no longer running, it should show something like:

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh -c "wlm use slurm; jobs; watch filter --running -u fred"
Every 2.0s: filter --running                                   Wed May 7 12:56:53 2017
No jobs found

    So far, the cluster is queuing or running jobs without cm-scale being used.
    The next steps are to modify the behavior by bringing in cm-scale. The administrator assigns the
ScaleServer role to the head node. Within the role a new static node provider, Slurm engine, and queue
tracker for the defq are set as follows:
8.3 Examples Of cm-scale Use                                                                        495

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device roles master
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles]% use scaleserver
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]]% resourceproviders
...->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders]% add static pool1
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[pool1*]]% set nodes node001..node005
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[pool1*]]% commit
...]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[pool1]]% ..;..
...]->roles[scaleserver]]% engines
...]->roles[scaleserver]->engines]% add hpc slurm1
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm1*]]% set wlmcluster slurm
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm1*]]% trackers
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm1*]->trackers]% add queue tr1
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm1*]->trackers*[tr1*]]% set queue defq
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm1*]->trackers*[tr1*]]% commit
...->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm1]->trackers[tr1]]%

   The nodes node001..node005 should already be in the queue defq, as assigned to them by default
when they were assigned the SlurmClient role. With these settings, they can now be powered up or
down on demand by cm-scale service, depending on the number of jobs that are pending. When the
new ScaleServer role is committed in cmsh or Base View, then the cm-scale service is started. If needed,
the administrator can check the log file /var/log/cm-scale to see what the service is doing.
   On each iteration cm-scale checks whether the node states should be changed. Thus after a while,
the nodes node003..node005 are started. Once up, they can start to process the jobs in the queue too.
   Watching the running jobs should show the newly-started nodes running too:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh -c "wlm use slurm; jobs ; watch filter --running"
Every 2.0s: filter --running                                Thu Apr 25 16:21:59 2024
Job ID Job name      User Queue Submit time Start time End time Nodes     Exit code
------ ------------- ---- ----- ----------- ---------- -------- -------- ----------
6147   slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:37     16:20:17 N/A        node004 0
6148   slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:37     16:20:17 N/A        node001 0
6149   slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:37     16:20:17 N/A        node003 0

   Eventually, cm-scale finds that all jobs have been dealt with, and the nodes are then powered down.

High-availability And Using A Configuration Overlay For The ScaleServer Role
For high-availability clusters, where there are two head nodes, the scaleserver should run on the active
head node. One labor-intensive way to set this up is to assign the service to both the head nodes,
and match the scaleserver settings on both head nodes. A simpler way is to define a configuration
overlay for the head nodes for the scaleserver. If the head nodes are basecm11-1 and basecm11-2, then
a configuration overlay called basecm11heads can be created and assigned the service as follows:

Example

[basecm11-1]% configurationoverlay add basecm11heads
[basecm11-1->configurationoverlay*[basecm11heads*]]% append nodes basecm11-1 basecm11-2
[basecm11-1->configurationoverlay*[basecm11heads*]]% roles
[basecm11-1->configurationoverlay*[basecm11heads*]->roles]% assign scaleserver
[basecm11-1->configurationoverlay*[basecm11heads*]->roles*[scaleserver*]]%
496                                                        NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

The scaleserver can then be configured within the configuration overlay instead of on a single head as
was done previously in the example of page 494. After carrying out a commit, the scaleserver settings
modifications are then mirrored automatically between the two head nodes.
   Outside the scaleserver settings, one extra modification is to set the cm-scale service to run on a
head node if the head node is active. This can be done with:

Example

[basecm11-1->configurationoverlay[basecm11heads]->roles[scaleserver]]% device services basecm11-1
[basecm11-1->device[basecm11-1]->services]% use cm-scale
[basecm11-1->device[basecm11-1]->services[cm-scale]]% set runif active
[basecm11-1->device*[basecm11-1*]->services*[cm-scale*]]% commit
[basecm11-1->device[basecm11-1]->services]% device use basecm11-2
[basecm11-1->device[basecm11-2]->services]% use cm-scale
[basecm11-1->device[basecm11-2]->services[cm-scale]]% set runif active
[basecm11-1->device*[basecm11-2*]->services*[cm-scale*]]% commit

      The result is a scaleserver that runs when the head node is active.

8.3.2 Simple Dynamic Node Provider Usage Example
The following example session explains how a dynamic node provider (page 480) can be configured
and used with cm-scale. The session considers a default cluster with a head node and 2 regular nodes
which have been previously defined in the BCM configuration, and also 1 cloud director node and 2
cloud compute nodes. The cloud nodes can be configured using cm-cluster-extension. Only the head
node is running at the start of the session, while the regular nodes and cloud nodes are all powered
down at the start of the run.
   At the start, the device status shows something like:

Example

[basecm11->device]% ds
eu-west-1-cnode001 ....... [       DOWN   ] (Unassigned)
eu-west-1-cnode002 ....... [       DOWN   ] (Unassigned)
eu-west-1-cnode003 ....... [       DOWN   ] (Unassigned)
eu-west-1-director ....... [       DOWN   ]
node001 .................. [       DOWN   ]
node002 .................. [       DOWN   ]
basecm11 ................. [        UP    ]

  The power control for the regular nodes must be functioning properly, or otherwise cm-scale cannot
power them on and off.
  If the head node has the slurmserver role, and the regular nodes have the slurmclient role, then
8.3 Examples Of cm-scale Use                                                                           497

the roleoverview command should show something like:

Example
[basecm11->device[basecm11]]% roleoverview
Role              Nodes                                  Categories                           Nodes up
----------------- -------------------------------------- ----------------------------         --------
boot              basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
cgroupsupervisor eu-west-1-cnode001..eu-west-1-cnode002 aws-cloud-director,default            1 of 6
                  ,eu-west-1-director,node001..node002   ,eu-west-1-cloud-node
                  ,basecm11
clouddirector     eu-west-1-director                                                          0 of 1
cloudgateway      basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
login             basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
master            basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
monitoring        basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
provisioning      eu-west-1-director,basecm11                                                 1 of 2
slurmclient       eu-west-1-cnode001..eu-west-1-cnode002 default,eu-west-1-cloud-node         0 of 3
                  ,node001..node002
slurmserver       basecm11                                                                    1 of 1
storage           eu-west-1-director,basecm11            aws-cloud-director                   1 of 2

   A test user, fred can be created by the administrator (section 6.2), and an MPI hello executable
based on the hello.c code (from section 3.5.1 of the User Manual) can be built:

Example
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ module add shared openmpi/gcc/64 slurm
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ mpicc hello.c -o hello

    A batch file slurmhello.sh (from section 5.3.1 of the User Manual) can be set up. Restricting it to 1
process per node so that it spreads over nodes easier for the purposes of the test can be done with the
settings:

Example
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ cat slurmhello.sh
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -o my.stdout
#SBATCH --time=30 #time limit to batch job
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
module add shared openmpi/gcc/64 slurm

mpirun /home/fred/hello

    A default cluster can queue or run jobs without cm-scale being used. The default behavior is modi-
fied in the next steps, which bring in the cm-scale service:
    The administrator assigns the ScaleServer role to the head node.
Example
[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device roles master
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles]% assign scaleserver

   Within the assigned scaleserver role, a new dynamic node provider can be set, and properties for
the dynamic pool of nodes can be set for the cloud compute nodes. Here the properties that are set are
priority (page 479), templatenode (page 480), noderange (page 480), and extranodes (page 481).
498                                                      NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Example

[basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]]% resourceproviders
...->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders]% add dynamic pool2
...resourceproviders*[pool2*]]% set priority 2
...resourceproviders*[pool2*]]% set noderange eu-west-1-cnode001..eu-west-1-cnode002
...resourceproviders*[pool2*]]% set templatenode eu-west-1-cnode001
...resourceproviders*[pool2*]]% set extranodes eu-west-1-director
...resourceproviders*[pool2*]]% commit
...resourceproviders[pool2]]%

    The regular compute nodes, node001..node002 should be specified as nodes in the static pool.
    The administrator may notice the similarity of dynamic and static pool configuration. The BCM front
end has deliberately been set up to present dynamic pool and static pool nodes to the cluster admin-
istrator as two different configuration methods. This is because separating the pool types as dynamic
and static pools is simpler for the cluster administrator to deal with. This way, regular compute nodes
are treated, not as a special case of a dynamic pool, but simply as static pool nodes. The fundamental
reason behind this separate treatment is because physical nodes cannot “materialize” dynamically with
properties in the way the cloud compute nodes–which are virtualized nodes—can, due to the need to
associate a MAC address with a physical node.
    Assigning regular compute nodes to a static pool can be done in a similar way to what was shown
before in the example on page 494.
    Continuing with the current session, the nodes node001..node002 are added to the static pool of
nodes, on-premises-nodes. For this example they are set to a lower priority than the cloud nodes:

Example

...->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders]% add static on-premises-nodes
...->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[on-premises-nodes*]]% set nodes node001..node002
...->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[on-premises-nodes*]]% set priority 1
...->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[on-premises-nodes*]]% commit
...->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[on-premises-nodes]]%

   What this lower priority means is that a node that is not up and is in the static pool of nodes, is only
powered on after all the cloud nodes are powered on and busy running jobs. If there happen to be nodes
from the static pool that are already up, but are not running jobs, then these nodes take a job, despite
the lower priority of the static pool, and irrespective of whether the dynamic pool nodes are in use.
   Job priorities can be overridden in cm-scale by:

   • allowing locations by setting Mix Locations to true (page 504) or

   • pinning queues by setting Pin Queues to true (page 506)

      A Slurm engine, and queue tracker for the defq are set as follows:

Example

...]->roles[scaleserver]]% engines
...]->roles[scaleserver]->engines]% add hpc slurm2
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm2]]% set wlmcluster slurm
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm2]]% trackers
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm2]->trackers]% add queue tr2
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm2]->trackers*[tr2*]]% set queue defq
...*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->engines*[slurm2*]->trackers*[tr2*]]% commit
...->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm2]->trackers[tr2]]%
8.3 Examples Of cm-scale Use                                                                        499

    The nodes node001..node002 and eu-west-1-cnode001..eu-west-1-cnode002 should already be
in the queue defq by default, ready to run the jobs:

Example
...->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm2]->trackers[tr2]]% wlm use slurm; jobqueue; get defq nodes
eu-west-1-cnode001
eu-west-1-cnode002
node001
node002

    The roleoverview (page 497) command is also handy for an overview, and to confirm that the role
assignment of these nodes are all set to the SlurmClient role:
    With these settings, the nodes in the dynamic pool can now be powered up or down on demand by
cm-scale service, depending on the number of jobs that are pending. When the new ScaleServer role
is committed in cmsh or Base View, then the cm-scale is run periodically. Each time it is run, cm-scale
checks whether the node states should be changed. If needed, the administrator can check the log file
/var/log/cm-scale to see what the service is doing.
    Job submission can now be carried out, and the scaleserver assignment carried out earlier scales the
cluster to cope with jobs according to the configuration that has been carried out in the session.
    Before submitting the batch jobs, the administrator or user can check the jobs that are queued and
running with the squeue command. If there are no jobs yet submitted, the output is simply the squeue
headers, with no job IDs listed:

Example
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ squeue
JOBID PARTITION     NAME       USER ST        TIME   NODES NODELIST(REASON)

   As in the previous example for the static pool only case (page 493), a way for user fred to flood the
default queue defq is to run the batch file in a loop:

Example
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ while (true); do sbatch slurmhello.sh; done
Submitted batch job 1
Submitted batch job 2
Submitted batch job 3
...

   After putting enough jobs into the queue (a few thousand should be enough, not more than five
thousand would be sensible), the flooding can be stopped with a ctrl-c.
   The changes in the queue can be watched by user fred:

Example
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ watch "squeue | head -5 ; squeue | tail -4"
Every 2.0s: squeue | head -5 ; squeue | tail -4              Wed Nov 22 16:08:52 2017

JOBID PARTITION     NAME       USER ST        TIME   NODES NODELIST(REASON)
    1      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
    2      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
    3      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
    4      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
 3556      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
 3557      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
 3558      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
 3559      defq slurmhel       fred PD        0:00       1 (Resources)
500                                                     NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

    The head -4 and tail -4 filters here are convenient for showing just the first 4 rows and last 4 rows
of the very long squeue output, and skipping the bulk of the queue.
    The preceding output illustrates how, with the jobs queued up, nothing is being processed yet from
jobs number 1 to 3559 due to the resources not yet being available.
    At this point cm-scale should have noticed that jobs are queued and that resources are needed to
handle the jobs.
    It should be noted that, at the time of writing of this section (January 2023), Slurm job processing
with Auto Scaler currently only works as expected if sbatch rather than srun is used for dynamic jobs.
The reason behind this srun quirk is explained on page 952.
    At the start of this example session the cloud director is not up. So, cm-scale powers it up. This can
be seen by running the ds command, or from CMDaemon info messages:

[basecm11->device]% ds | grep director
eu-west-1-director [ DOWN ]
 then some time later:
eu-west-1-director [ PENDING ] (External ip assigned: 34.249.166.63, setting up tunnel)
 then some time later:
eu-west-1-director [      INSTALLING     ] (node installer started)
 then some time later:
eu-west-1-director [ INSTALLER_CALLINGINIT ] (switching to local root)
 then some time later:
eu-west-1-director [   UP    ]

    If the cloud director is yet to be provisioned to the cloud from the head node for the very first time
(“from scratch”), then that can take a while. Then, because the cloud compute nodes are in turn provi-
sioned from the cloud director, it takes a while for the cloud compute nodes to be ready to run the jobs.
So, the jobs just have to wait around in the queue until the cloud compute nodes are ready, before they
are handled. Fortunately, the startup of a cloud director is by default much faster after the very first
time.
    A quick aside about how provisioning is speeded up the next time around: The cloud compute nodes
will be stopped if they are idle, and after there are no more jobs in the queue, because the jobs have all
been dealt with. Then, when the extranodeidletime setting has been exceeded, the cloud director is
also stopped. The next time that jobs are queued up, all the cloud nodes are provisioned from a stopped
state, rather than from scratch, and so they are ready for job execution much faster. Therefore, unlike
the first time, the jobs queued up the next time are processed with less waiting around.
    Getting back to how things proceed in the example session after the cloud director is up: cm-scale
then provisions the cloud compute nodes eu-west-1-node001 and eu-west-1-node002 from the cloud
director.

Example

[basecm11->device]% ds | grep cnode
eu-west-1-cnode001 ....... [ PENDING ] (Waiting for instance to start)
eu-west-1-cnode002 ....... [ PENDING ] (Waiting for instance to start)
 then some time later:
eu-west-1-cnode002 [     INSTALLING      ] (node installer started)
eu-west-1-cnode001 [     INSTALLING      ] (node installer started)
 and so on

   Once these cloud compute nodes reach the state of UP, they can start to process the jobs in the queue.
The queue activity then would show something like:

Example
8.3 Examples Of cm-scale Use                                                                                          501

 when the dynamic pool nodes are being readied for job execution:
[fred@basecm11 ~]$ squeue | head -5 ; squeue | tail -4
JOBID PARTITION         NAME        USER ST             TIME NODES NODELIST(REASON)
    1        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
    2        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
    3        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
    4        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
 3556        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
 3557        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
 3558        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)
 3559        defq slurmhel          fred PD             0:00      1 (Resources)

 then later:

JOBID PARTITION     NAME              USER ST           TIME    NODES NODELIST(REASON)
   11      defq slurmhel              fred CF           0:00        1 eu-west-1-cnode001
   12      defq slurmhel              fred CF           0:00        1 eu-west-1-cnode002
   13      defq slurmhel              fred CF           0:00        1 (priority)
   14      defq slurmhel              fred CG           0:00        1 (priority)
 3556      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00        1 (Priority)
 3557      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00        1 (Priority)
 3558      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00        1 (Priority)
 3559      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00        1 (Priority)

 then later, when cm-scale sees all of the dynamic pool is used up, the lower priority static pool gets started up:

JOBID PARTITION     NAME              USER ST           TIME NODES NODELIST(REASON)
  165      defq slurmhel              fred CF           0:00     1 eu-west-1-cnode001
  166      defq slurmhel              fred CF           0:00     1 node001
  168      defq slurmhel              fred CG           0:00     1 node002
 3556      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00     1 (Priority)
 3557      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00     1 (Priority)
 3558      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00     1 (Priority)
 3559      defq slurmhel              fred PD           0:00     1 (Priority)
  167      defq slurmhel              fred R            0:00     1 eu-west-1-cnode002

In cmsh, the priority can be checked with:

Example

[basecm11 ->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders]% list
Name (key)        Priority     Enabled
----------------- ------------ -------
on-premises-nodes 1            yes
pool2             2            yes

Also in cmsh, the jobs can be listed via the jobs submode:

Example

[basecm11->wlm[slurm]->jobs]% list | head -5 ; list | tail -4
Type   Job ID User Queue Running time Status        Nodes
------ ------ ----- ----- ------------ ----------   ------------------
Slurm 334     fred defq 1s             COMPLETED    eu-west-1-cnode001
Slurm 336     fred defq 1s             COMPLETED    node001
Slurm 3556 fred defq 0s                PENDING
Slurm 3557 fred defq 0s                PENDING
502                                                       NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

Slurm 3558 fred defq 0s                     PENDING
Slurm 3559 fred defq 0s                     PENDING
Slurm 335     fred defq 1s                  RUNNING       eu-west-1-cnode002
[basecm11->wlm[slurm]->jobs]%

      Eventually, when the queue has been fully processed, the jobs are all gone:

Example

[fred@basecm11 ~]$ squeue
JOBID PARTITION     NAME         USER ST        TIME   NODES NODELIST(REASON)

    With the current configuration the cloud compute nodes in the dynamic pool pool2 are powered up
before the regular compute nodes in the static pool on-premises-nodes. That is because the cloud com-
pute nodes have been set by the administrator in this example to have a higher priority. This is typically
sub-optimal, and is actually configured this way just for illustrative purposes. In a real production clus-
ter, the priority of regular nodes is typically going to be set higher than that for cloud compute nodes,
because using on-premises nodes is likely to be cheaper.
    The administrator can also check on the job status via the job metrics of cmsh too, using the options
to the filter command, such as --pending or --running:
    Initially, before the jobs are being run, something like this will show up:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh -c "wlm use slurm; jobs ; watch filter --running -u fred"
Every 2.0s: filter --running -u fred                             Wed Nov 22 16:03:18 2017
No jobs found

    Then, eventually, when the jobs are being run, the cloud nodes, which have a higher priority, start
job execution, so that the output looks like:

Example

Every 2.0s: filter --running -u fred                             Wed Nov 22 16:50:35 2017
Job ID Job name      User Queue Submit time Start time End time Nodes           Exit code
------ ------------- ---- ----- ----------- ---------- -------- --------------- ---------
406    slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:56     16:27:21   N/A     eu-west1-cnode001 0
407    slurmhello.sh fred defq 16:16:56     16:27:21   N/A     eu-west1-cnode002 0

   and eventually the regular on-site nodes which are originally down are started up by the ScaleServer
and are also listed.

8.4      Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples
8.4.1 Dynamic Nodes Re-purposing
Sometimes it is useful to share the same nodes among several queues, and reuse the nodes for jobs
from other queues. This can be done by dynamically assigning node categories in cm-scale. Different
settings, or a different software image, then run on the re-assigned node after re-provisioning.
    The feature is enabled by setting Assign Category parameter in the tracker settings.
    For example, the following case uses Slurm as the workload engine, and sets up two queues chem_q
and phys_q. Assuming in this example that jobs that are to go to chem_q require chemistry software on the
node, but jobs for phys_q require physics software on the node, and that for some reason the softwares
cannot run on the node at the same time. Then, the nodes can be re-purposed dynamically. That is, the
same node can be used for chemistry or physics jobs by setting up the appropriate configuration for it.
In this case the same node can be used by jobs that require a different configuration, software, or even
operating system. The trackers configuration may then look as follows:
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                            503

Example

[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm]->trackers[chem]]% show
Parameter                        Value
-------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
Type                             ScaleHpcQueueTracker
Name                             chem
Queue                            chem_q
Enabled                          yes
Assign Category                  chem_cat
Primary Overlays
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm]->trackers[chem]]% use phys
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm]->trackers[phys]]% show
Parameter                        Value
-------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
Type                             ScaleHpcQueueTracker
Name                             chem
Queue                            chem_q
Enabled                          yes
Assign Category                  phys_cat
Primary Overlays
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->engines[slurm]->trackers[phys]]%

    Assuming that initially there are two nodes, node001 and node002, both in category chem_cat. Then,
when cm-scale finds a pending job in queue phys_q, it may decide to assign category phys_cat to either
node001, or to node002. In this way the number of nodes serving queue phys_q increases and number
of nodes serving chem_q decreases, in order to handle the current workload. When the job is finished,
the old node category is not assigned back to the node, until a new job appears in chem_q and requires
this node to have the old category.

8.4.2 Pending Reasons
This section is related only to HPC engines (workload managers). In this section, the term job is used
instead of workload.
    If cm-scale makes a decision on how many nodes should be started for a job, then it checks the
status of the job first. If the job status is pending, then it checks the list of pending reasons for that job.
The checks are to find pending reasons that prevent the job from starting when more free nodes become
available.
    A pending reason can be one of the following 3 types:

Type 1: allows a job to start when new free nodes become available

Type 2: prevents a job from starting on particular nodes only

Type 3: prevents a job from starting anywhere

   Each pending reason has a text associated with it.          The text is usually printed by the
workload manager job statistics utilities. The list of pending reasons texts of types 1 and 2
can be found in the pending reasons exclude file, /cm/local/apps/cm-scale/lib/python3.
12/site-packages/cmscale/trackers/hpc_queue/pending_reasons/WLM.exclude, where WLM is a
name of workload manager specified in the configuration of the engine in ScaleServer role.
   In the pending reasons exclude file, the pending reason texts are listed as one reason per line. The
reasons are grouped in two sublists, with headers:

   • [IGNORE_ALWAYS]

   • [IGNORE_NO_NODE]
504                                                       NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

    The [IGNORE_ALWAYS] sublist lists the type 1 pending reason texts. If a job has only this group of
reasons, then cm-scale considers the job as ready to start, and attempts to create or boot compute nodes
for it.
    The [IGNORE_NO_NODE] sublist lists the type 2 pending reason texts. If the reason does not specify
the hostname of a new free node at the end of a pending reason after the colon (“:”), then the job can
start on the node. If the reason does specify the hostname of a new free node after the colon, and if
the hostname is owned by one of the managed nodes—nodes that can be stopped/started/created by
cm-scale—then the job is considered as one that is not to start, when nodes become available.
    If a job has a pending reason text that is not in the pending reasons exclude file, then it is assumed to
be a type 3 reason. New free nodes for such a job do not get the job started.
    If there are several pending reason texts for a job, then cm-scale checks all the pending reasons one
by one. If all reasons are from the IGNORE_ALWAYS or IGNORE_NO_NODE sublists, and if a pending reason text
matched in the IGNORE_NO_NODE sublist does not include hostnames for the managed nodes, only then
will the job be considered as one that can be started just with new nodes.

Custom Pending Reasons
If the workload manager supports them, then custom pending reason texts are also supported. The
administrator can add a pending reason text to one of the sections in the pending reasons exclude file.
    The cm-scale service checks only if the pending reason text for the job starts with a text from the
pending reasons file. It is therefore enough to specify just a part of the text of the reason in order to
make cm-scale take it into account. Regular expressions are also supported. For example, the next two
pending reason expressions are equivalent when used to match the pending reason text Not enough
job slot(s):

Example

   • Not enough

   • Not enough [a-z]* slot(s)

   The workload manager statistics utility can be used to find out what custom pending reason texts
there are, and to add them to the pending reasons file. To do this, some test job can be forced to have
such a pending reason, and the output of the job statistics utility can then be copy-pasted. For example,
LSF shows custom pending reasons that look like this:

Example

  Customized pending reason number <integer>

   Here, <integer> is an identifier (an unsigned integer) for the pending reason, as defined by the ad-
ministrator.

8.4.3 Locations
Sometimes it makes sense to restrict the workload manager to run jobs only on a defined subset of nodes.
For example, if a user submits a multi-node job, then it is typically better to run all the job processes
either on the on-premises nodes, or on the cloud nodes. That is, without mixing the node types used for
the job. The locations feature of cm-scale allows this kind of restriction for HPC workload managers.
    The cm-scale configuration allows one of these two modes to be selected:
  1. forced location: when the workload is forced to use one of the locations chosen by cm-scale,

  2. unforced location: when workloads are free to run on any of the compute nodes that are already
     managed (running, freed or started) by cm-scale. This is the default if Auto Scaler is set up.
   In NVIDIA Base Command Manager 11, for a forced location, cm-scale supports these two different
locations:
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                      505

  1. local: on-premises nodes,

  2. cloud: AWS instances (Chapter 3 of the Cloudbursting Manual) or Azure instances (Chapter 5 of
     the Cloudbursting Manual)

    To restrict the WLM location—that is to choose a forced location—the mixlocations advanced set-
ting in the scaleserver role for the node must be set to no

Example

[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]% set mixlocations no
[basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->advancedsettings*]% commit

   The location is automatically configured by BCM when the node is added to the workload manager.
Details per workload manager are described next.

Slurm
Slurm does not allow the assignment of node properties—features, in Slurm terminology—to jobs if no
node exists that is labeled by this property. Thus any property used must be added to some node. This
can be the template node if a dynamic resource provider is used, or it can be an appropriate off-premises
node if a static resource provider is used. If the slurmclient role is assigned to a node—for example, a
template node—then the location value for this node is automatically configured by BCM.
   The current location value can be found using the scontrol command. For example, for node001:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# module load slurm
[root@basecm11 ~]# scontrol show node node001 | grep AvailableFeatures

PBS
A new generic resource, resources_available.location, lets the administrator decide the locations
where cm-scale can run PBS jobs.
   If the pbsproclient role is assigned to a node, then the location value for this node is automatically
configured by BCM.
   The current location value for a node can be found using the qmgr command. For example, for
node001:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# module load openpbs
[root@basecm11 ~]# qmgr -c "print node node001" | grep location
set node node001 resources_available.location = local

LSF
In order to allow cm-scale to restrict LSF jobs, BCM configures a generic resource called location per
node. The resource is added as a string resource in lsf.cluster.<CLUSTER_NAME:> configuration file.
    The location value for this node is automatically configured by BCM.
    To verify that the resource is added, the lshosts -s command can be run:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# lshosts -s location | head -1;                lshosts -s location | grep node001
RESOURCE                                VALUE           LOCATION
location                                local           node001.cm.cluster
506                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

8.4.4 Azure Storage Accounts Assignment
If an Azure node is cloned manually from some node or node template, then the Azure node gets the
same storage account as the node it has been cloned from. This may slow the nodes down if too many
nodes use the same storage account. The cm-scale utility can therefore assign different storage accounts
to nodes that are cloned like this.
    The maximum number of nodes for such a storage account is defined by the
AZURE_DISK_ACCOUNT_NODES parameter. This parameter has a value of 20 by default, and can be
changed in the configuration file /cm/local/apps/cm-scale/lib/python3.12/site-packages/
cmscale/config.py. The cm-scale utility must be restarted after the change.
    The newly-cloned-by-cm-scale Azure node gets a randomly-generated storage account name if
other storage accounts already have enough nodes associated with them. That is, if other storage ac-
counts have AZURE_DISK_ACCOUNT_NODES or more nodes.
    The storage account name is assigned in the node cloud settings in storage submode. For example,
in cmsh, the assigned storage accounts can be viewed as follows:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device use cnode001
[basecm11->device[cnode001]]% cloudsettings
[basecm11->device[cnode001]->cloudsettings]% storage
[basecm11->...[cnode001]->cloudsettings->storage]% get root-disk storageaccountname
azurepaclogzjus1
[basecm11->...[cnode001]->cloudsettings->storage]% get node-installer-disk storageaccountname
azurepaclogzjus1
[basecm11->device[cnode001]->cloudsettings->storage]% ..
[basecm11->device[cnode001]->cloudsettings]% get bootdiagnosticsstorageaccountname
azurepaclogzjus1
[basecm11->device[cnode001]->cloudsettings]%

   If a node is terminated and removed from the BCM configuration, then the storage account remains
in Azure. It has to be explicitly manually removed by the administrator.

8.4.5 Uptake of HPC Jobs By Particular Types Of Nodes
By default, cm-scale assumes that an HPC job submitted to a particular queue can take a node from
outside the queue. This is because by assigning a category, or moving the node to a configuration
overlay, the node will be moved to the appropriate queue eventually. From this point of view, the nodes
form a single resource pool, and the nodes in the pool are re-purposed on demand.
   In some scenarios there is a need for certain types of HPC jobs run only on particular types of nodes,
without the nodes being re-purposed. A typical example: jobs with GPU code require cloud nodes that
have access to GPU accelerators, while jobs that do not have GPU code can use the less expensive non-
GPU cloud nodes. For this case then, the GPU cloud node is started when the GPU job requires a node,
and otherwise a non-GPU node is started.
   Job segregation is achieved in cm-scale as follows:

  1. The Pin Queues setting, which is an advanced setting in the scaleserver role for the node, is
     enabled:

      [basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]% set pinqueues yes
      [basecm11->device*[basecm11*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->advancedsettings*]% commit

  2. A new queue is created, or an existing one is used. The queue is used for the jobs that require a
     particular node type.
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                        507

  3. The particular node type is added to this queue. If the node is already defined in BCM, then the
     administrator can assign the queue to the node in the workload manager client role. For example,
     if the workload manager is Slurm, then the queue is assigned to the nodes in the slurmclient
     role. If the node has not been defined yet and will be cloned on demand (according to the dynamic
     resource provider settings, page 480), then its template node is assigned to the queue. When a new
     node is cloned from the template, the queue is then inherited from the template node.

  4. The previous two steps are repeated for each job type.

    After that, if a user submits a job to one of the queues, then cm-scale starts or clones a node that is
linked with the job queue.
    The following cmsh session snippet shows a configuration example:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% device roles master
[basecm11->device[basecm11]->roles]% use scaleserver
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]]% resourceproviders
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders]% add dynamic rp1
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp1*]]% set templatenode tnode1
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp1*]]% set noderange cnode001..cnode100
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp1*]]% commit
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[rp1]]% clone rp2
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp2*]]% set templatenode tnode2
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp2*]]% set noderange cnode101..cnode200
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders*[rp2*]]% commit
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[rp2]]% ..;..
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]]% engines
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines]% add hpc s1
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]]% set workloadmanager slurm
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]]% trackers
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]->trackers]]% add queue tr1
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]->trackers*[tr1*]]% set queue q1
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]->trackers*[tr1*]]% commit
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines[e1]->trackers[tr1]]% clone tr2
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]->trackers*[tr2*]]% set queue q2
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines*[e1*]->trackers*[tr2*]]% commit
[basecm11->...roles[scaleserver]->engines[e1]->trackers[tr2]]% category
[basecm11->category]% clone default cat1
[basecm11->category*[cat1*]]% roles
[basecm11->category*[cat1*]->roles*]% assign slurmclient
[basecm11->category*[cat1*]->roles*[slurmclient*]]% set queues q1
[basecm11->category*[cat1*]->roles*[slurmclient*]]% commit
[basecm11->category[cat1]->roles[slurmclient]]% category clone cat1 cat2
[basecm11->category*[cat2*]->roles*[slurmclient*]]% set queues q2
[basecm11->category*[cat2*]->roles*[slurmclient*]]% commit
[basecm11->category[cat2]->roles[slurmclient]]% device use tnode1
[basecm11->device[tnode1]]% set category cat1
[basecm11->device*[tnode1*]]% commit
[basecm11->device[tnode1]]% device use tnode2
[basecm11->device[tnode2]]% set category cat2
[basecm11->device*[tnode2*]]% commit
[basecm11->device[tnode2]]%

   Using the preceding configuration, the user may submit a job with a regular workload manager
508                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

submission utility specifying the queue q1 or q2, depending on whether the job requires nodes that
should be cloned from tnode1 or from tnode2.

8.4.6 How To Exclude Unused Nodes From Being Stopped
If a node is idle, then by default cm-scale automatically stops or terminates the node.
    However, in some cases there may be a need to start a node on demand, and when it becomes
idle, there may be a need to keep the node running. This can be useful if the administrator would
like to investigate the performance of an application, or to debug some issues. After completing the
investigation or debug session, the administrator can stop the node manually.
    The parameter KEEP_RUNNING_RANGES keeps such nodes from being stopped or terminated. The
parameter should be added to the configuration file /cm/local/apps/cm-scale/lib/python3.12/
site-packages/cmscale/config.py. To have the changed setting take effect, the cm-scale service must
be restarted.
    KEEP_RUNNING_RANGES defines a map of resource provider names to node name ranges.
    Extra nodes can be added to the range of the nodes. However, if the extra node must not be stopped
or terminated by cm-scale, then for each resource provider that has such an extra node, the value of
extranodestop must be set to yes.
    In the following example, nodes cnode002, cnode003, cnode004, and cnode010, are associated with
the azurenodes1 resource provider. They are therefore never stopped or terminated by cm-scale. They
are only started on demand by cm-scale.
    The nodes cnode012 and cnode014 are associated with the azurenodes2 resource provider. They are
therefore also not stopped or terminated by cm-scale.

Example

opts = {
  [...]
  "KEEP_RUNNING_RANGES": {
    "azurenodes1": "cnode002..cnode004,cnode010",
    "azurenodes2": "cnode012,cnode014"
  }
}

8.4.7 Prolog And Epilog Scripts With Auto Scaler
Sometimes the administrator would like some actions to be performed for a workload when the Auto
Scaler allocates and starts using a node, or when the Auto Scaler deallocates and stops using a node.
The administrator can arrange such actions by configuring prolog and epilog scripts (section 7.3.4) in
the resource provider. The scripts are then executed on the nodes running the Auto Scaler service, i.e.
with the ScaleServer role.
   Both the dynamic and the static resource providers (section 8.2.2) support the following options:

  1. allocationProlog: path to a shell script that is executed just before a node is started up by Auto
     Scaler

  2. allocationEpilog: path to a shell script that is executed just before a node is powered off by Auto
     Scaler

  3. allocationScriptsTimeout: the prolog and epilog scripts timeout (the script that is running is
     killed if the timeout is exceeded).

   The prolog script runs when an existing node is about to start, and also runs when a node has just
been cloned and is also about start.
   The epilog script runs when a node is stopped or when a cloud node is terminated.
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                           509

    The prolog and epilog scripts are run per node, and can run in parallel. Thus if synchronization
between them is needed, then it should be implemented by the scripts themselves.
    The standard output and error messages of the executed scripts are mixed and added to the Auto
Scaler as debug2 log messages (the debug2 logs can be enabled in the AdvancedSettings submode of the
ScaleServer role). It therefore makes sense to keep the output reasonably small, informative, and human
readable.
    When the scripts are run, Auto Scaler passes environment variables that can be used inside the scripts
in order to decide what to do. These environment variables are:

   1. AS_NODE: node short hostname which the script started for;

   2. AS_SCRIPT_TYPE: either "epilog" or "prolog";

   3. AS_RESOURCE_PROVIDER: name of the resource provider where this script is configured;

   4. AS_ENGINE: workload engine name, which workload requires the node ("unknown" if no workload
      requires the node).

   By default the scripts are not defined, and therefore nothing is executed by default when nodes are
stopped, terminated or started.

8.4.8 Queue Node Placeholders
A queue node placeholder is a node that does not yet exist, but has a corresponding object that exists,
and the object has queues defined, amongst other properties. It can be used to plan resource use.

Job Rejection For Exceeding Total Cluster Resources
At the time of job submission, the workload manager checks the total available number of slots (used
and unused) in a queue. This is the sum of the available slots (used and unused) provided by each node
in that queue.

   • Jobs that require less than the total number of slots are normally made to wait until more slots
     become available.

   • Jobs that require more than this total number of slots are normally rejected outright by the work-
     load manager, without being put into a wait state. This is because workload managers normally
     follow a logic that relies on the assumption that if the job demands more slots than can exist on the
     cluster as it is configured at present, then the cluster will never have enough slots to allow a job to
     run.

Assuming The Resources Can Never Be Provided
The latter assumption, that a cluster will never have enough slots to allow a job to run, is not true when
the number of slots is dynamic, as is the case when cm-scale is used. When cm-scale starts up nodes,
it adds them to a job queue, and the workload manager is automatically configured to allow users to
submit jobs to the enlarged queue. That is, the newly available slots are configured as soon as possible
so that waiting jobs are dealt with as soon as possible. For jobs that have already been rejected, and are
not waiting, this is irrelevant, and users would have to submit the jobs once again.
    Ideally, in this case, the workload manager should be configured to know about the number of nodes
and slots that can be started up in the future, even if they do not exist yet. Based on that, jobs that would
normally be rejected, could then also get told to wait until the resources are available, if it turns out that
configured future resources will be enough to run the job.

Slurm Resources Planning With Placeholders
Slurm allows nodes that do not exist yet to be defined. These are nodes with hostnames that do not
resolve, and have the Slurm setting of state=CLOUD for cloud nodes, and state=FUTURE for other nodes.
510                                                    NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

BCM allows Slurm to add such “fake” nodes to Slurm queues dynamically, when not enough real nodes
have yet been added. BCM supports this feature only for Slurm at present.
   This feature is not yet implemented for the other workload managers because they require the host-
name of nodes that have been added to the workload manager configuration to be resolved.
   Within the Slurm WLM instance it is possible to set a list of placeholder objects. In cmsh this can be
done within the main wlm mode, selecting the Slurm instance, and then going into the placeholders
submode. Each placeholder allows the following values to be set:

   • queue: the queue name, used as key

   • maxnodes: the maximum number of nodes that this queue allows

   • basenodename: the base node name that is used when a new node name is generated

   • templatenode: a template node that is used to provide user properties taken from its slurmclient
     role when new fake nodes are added.

    For example, the following cmsh session uses the head node with an existing slurm instance to illus-
trate how the Slurm queue defq could be configured so that it always has a maximum of 32 nodes, with
the nodes being like node001:

Example

[root@basecm11 ~]# scontrol show part defq | grep " Nodes="
Nodes=node001
[root@basecm11 ~]# cmsh
[basecm11]% wlm use slurm
[basecm11->wlm[slurm]]% placeholders
[basecm11->wlm[slurm]->placeholders]% add defq
[basecm11->wlm*[slurm*]->placeholders*[defq*]]% set maxnodes 32
[basecm11->wlm*[slurm*]->placeholders*[defq*]]% set basenodename placeholder
[basecm11->wlm*[slurm*]->placeholders*[defq*]]% set templatenode node001
[basecm11->wlm*[slurm*]->placeholders*[defq*]]% commit
[basecm11->wlm[slurm]->placeholders[defq]]%
[root@basecm11 ~]# scontrol show part defq | grep " Nodes="
   Nodes=node001,placeholder[01-31]

   If a new real node is added to the queue, then the number of placeholder nodes is decreased by one.
   The placeholders can also be configured in Base View via the HPC resource, using the navigation
path:
   HPC > Workload Management Clusters > <Slurm instance> > JUMP TO Placeholders

Preventing slurmctld From Restarting
If the number of nodes is changed, or if their names are changed in slurm.conf, then CMDaemon restarts
the Slurm server daemon, slurmctld, to apply the changes. If the administrator needs to prevent
slurmctld from restarting each time that a new node is added to Slurm, then the nodes can be added, or
cloned, to the BCM configuration manually, even if they do not have any IP address assigned yet. This
is assuming that they get their IP addresses assigned over DHCP later on.
     If the nodes are added to the configuration manually, then CMDaemon restarts slurmctld only once.
This means that, when cm-scale starts the nodes, CMDaemon does not restart slurmctld.

8.4.9 Auto Scaling A Job On-premises To A Workload Manager And Kubernetes
In the session for this section, a cluster with 4 nodes is assumed. A workload manager such as Slurm is
assumed to be already set as the engine (Use Case: Workload Manager (On-premises), page 470).
    If the cluster administrator now would also like to make a Kubernetes engine available to jobs, as
suggested in the use case 2 on page 463, then it can be added within the scaleserver role as follows:
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                     511

Example

[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->engines]% list
Name (key)       Priority
---------------- ------------
slurm            0
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines]% add kubernetes k8s
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[k8s*]]% set cluster default
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[k8s*]]% trackers
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[k8s*]->trackers]% add namespace default
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...[k8s*]->trackers*[default*]]% set controllernamespace default
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[k8s*]->trackers*[default*]]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[k8s]->trackers[default]]%

   In the trackers for each engine, the overlay to move to must be specified:

Example

[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[k8s]->trackers[default]]% set primaryoverlays kube-default-worker
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[k8s*]->trackers*[default*]]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[k8s]->trackers[default]]% ..
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[k8s]->trackers]% ..
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[k8s]]% ..
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines]% use slurm
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[slurm]]% trackers
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[slurm]->trackers]% use defq
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[slurm]->trackers[defq]]% set primaryoverlays slurm-client
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*...->engines*[slurm*]->trackers*[defq*]]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->engines[slurm]->trackers[defq]]%

   Since the cluster is entirely on-premises, and no cloud nodes are to be used, there is no need to
configure a dynamic provider (section 8.3.2).
   To allow movement of jobs from one queue to another, queue pinning must be disabled:

Example

[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]% set pinqueues no
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*[autoscaler*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->advancedsettings*]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]%

    Auto scaler normally takes the amount of memory into account from the workload manager. How-
ever, Slurm does not know about the memory of nodes that are not managed by it. A default memory
size should therefore be set for when a job requirement is matched to Slurm, using the default resources
specification (page 466):

Example

[basecm11->configurationoverlay...->resourceproviders[static]]% set defaultresources "mem_free:slurm=7GB"
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*[autoscaler*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->resourceproviders*[static*]]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[static]]%

The nodes reboot when a job requires it:

Example
512                                                        NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[static]]%
Tue Aug 16 11:43:40 2022 [notice] basecm11: node003 [       BOOTING       ] (ldlinux.c32 from basecm11)
Tue Aug 16 11:43:40 2022 [notice] basecm11: node004 [       BOOTING       ] (ldlinux.c32 from basecm11)
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[static]]%
Tue Aug 16 11:44:22 2022 [notice] basecm11: node004 [     INSTALLING      ] (node installer started)
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[static]]%
Tue Aug 16 11:44:24 2022 [notice] basecm11: node003 [     INSTALLING      ] (node installer started)
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->resourceproviders[static]]%

8.4.10 AWS Spot Instances And Availability Zones
Amazon cloud regions consist of multiple, isolated, availability zones. The number of spot instances that
can be started in each zone is limited by the capacity of a zone. If the spot instances are configured to
start in several different availability zones, then Auto Scaler detects this and tries to start nodes in those
various different availability zones. At the start of each iteration of cm-scale, if cm-scale sees that the
capacity of a zone is exhausted, then all nodes in that zone are considered to be unavailable for starting
up by cm-scale.
    Configuring several sets of spot instances in availability zones allows running nodes to be started up,
even if the capacity in one or more zones is exhausted. For this configuration, the cluster administrator
has two options:

   1. Configuring the nodes from different availability zones in one workload manager job queue or
      Kubernetes namespace.

   2. Having the nodes in different queues/namespaces, and letting users submit the jobs to multi-
      ple queues at the same time, so that cm-scale goes through the queues when selecting a node
      to start. This option requires multi-queue support in the workload manager. In this case, the
      allowedresourceproviders parameter should not be set within the trackers submode (sec-
      tion 8.2.6) for the engine.

    If cloud nodes (spot instances) from different availability zones are added to the scaleserver role,
then the lack of capacity is recognized by cm-scale automatically, and no additional configuration is
needed.
    The cluster administrator can however still override the availability zones information for cm-scale.
This can be carried out by modifying the cm-scale configuration file:
/cm/local/apps/cm-scale/lib/*/site-packages/cmscale/config.py
In the file, a new parameter AVAILABILITY_ZONES must be added to the opts dictionary. The format the
parameter takes is as follows:

Example

{"AVAILABILITY_ZONES" : {<provider name> : {<availability zone name> : <node list in node range format>}}

      For example, for the us-west-* availability zones:

Example

      "AVAILABILITY_ZONES": {
          "aws": {
              "us-west-2a": "cpu-001..cpu-005, cpu-spot-a-001..cpu-spot-a-010",
              "us-west-2c": "cpu-spot-c-001..cpu-spot-c-010",
              "us-west-2d": "cpu-spot-d-001..cpu-spot-d-010",
          },
      },

   Currently, availability zones are supported by Auto Scaler only for AWS. Auto Scaler ignores any
lack of capacity in the availability zones of other cloud providers.
8.4 Further cm-scale Configuration And Examples                                                    513

8.4.11 Auto Scaler Statistics
Internal Auto Scaler metrics can be collected and visualized with BCM monitoring. The metrics can be
used to help debug some issues, or can be used to analyze how Auto Scaler works over longer periods
of time.
    When statistics collection is enabled, Auto Scaler pushes its metrics to CMDaemon. The metric data
values are then accessible using cmsh and Base View.
    Statistics collection can be enabled

   • by enabling the option during Auto Scaler setup with cm-auto-scaler-setup. The option can be
     enabled in the Auto Scaler base options screen (figure 8.3)
     or

   • by setting the collectstatistics parameter within the advanced settings of the scaleserver
     role.

Example

[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]% set collectstatistics yes
[basecm11->configurationoverlay*[autoscaler*]->roles*[scaleserver*]->advancedsettings*]% commit
[basecm11->configurationoverlay[autoscaler]->roles[scaleserver]->advancedsettings]%

    During Auto Scaler setup with cm-auto-scaler-setup, the AutoScaler standalone monitoring en-
tity is added. This is what is used for metrics aggregation and viewing:

Example

[basecm11->monitoring]% standalone
[basecm11->monitoring->standalone]% use autoscaler
[basecm11->monitoring->standalone[AutoScaler]]% latestmetricdata
Measurable                         Parameter    Type         Value      Age        State      Info
---------------------------------- ------------ ------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------
no_resources_workloads                          Workloads    4          24.1s
pending_workloads                               Workload     4          24.1s
pre_iteration_down_nodes                        Nodes        16         24.1s
pre_iteration_completely_up_nodes               Nodes        16         24.1s
running_workloads                               Workload     2          24.1s
no_capacity_spot_requests          eu-west-2a Nodes          2          24.1s
no_capacity_availability_zones                  Nodes        1          24.1s
[basecm11->monitoring->standalone[AutoScaler]]%

   In Base View, the Auto Scaler metrics can be found, after collection has started, via the navigation
path:
      Monitoring > Auto Scaler
   The statistic metrics are divided into three classes: Actions, Nodes and Workloads:

  1. Actions:

        • assigned_categories: number of node category assignments performed by Auto Scaler
        • cloned_nodes: number of nodes cloned by Auto Scaler
        • terminated_nodes: number of nodes terminated by Auto Scaler
        • spot_requests_terminations: number of spot instance requests terminated by Auto Scaler
        • removed_nodes: number of nodes removed by Auto Scaler
        • moved_to_overlays_nodes: number of nodes moved to overlays by Auto Scaler
        • deleted_from_overlays_nodes: number of nodes deleted from overlays by Auto Scaler
514                                               NVIDIA Base Command Manager Auto Scaler

      • drained_nodes: number of nodes drained by Auto Scaler
      • undrained_nodes: number of nodes undrained by Auto Scaler
      • started_nodes: number of nodes started (powered on) by Auto Scaler
      • stopped_nodes: number of nodes stopped (powered off) by Auto Scaler
      • shutdown_nodes: number of nodes shut down by Auto Scaler
      • executed_prologs: number of prologs executed by Auto Scaler
      • executed_epilogs: number of epilogs executed by Auto Scaler
      • constrained_workloads: number of workloads (jobs, pods, ...) constrained by Auto Scaler

  2. Nodes:

      • pre_iteration_completely_up_nodes: number of nodes running (completely up) at the be-
        ginning of each iteration
      • pre_iteration_down_nodes: number of nodes in state down at the beginning of each itera-
        tion
      • pre_iteration_pending_nodes: number of pending nodes at the beginning of each iteration
      • no_capacity_spot_requests: number of pending spot instance requests that could not be
        fulfilled due to the lack of capacity per availability zone
      • no_capacity_availability_zones: number of availability zones that nodes could not start
        due to the lack of capacity

  3. Workloads:

      • not_allowed_workloads: number of workloads for which a start was not allowed
      • no_resources_workloads: number of workloads for which a resources request could not be
        satisfied
      • pending_workloads: number of pending workloads
      • running_workloads: number of running workloads
      • failed_workloads: number of failed workloads
      • unknown_workloads: number of workloads in an unknown state
